The Allegory of the Cave
unknown
Plato
Socrates and Glaucon:
“And now,” I [Socrates] said, “let me show in a figure how far our nature is enlightened or unenlightened—Behold! human beings living in a underground den, which has a mouth open towards the light and reaching all along the den; here they have been from their childhood, and have their legs and necks chained so that they cannot move, and can only see before them, being prevented by the chains from turning round their heads. Above and behind them a fire is blazing at a distance, and between the fire and the prisoners there is a raised way; and you will see, if you look, a low wall built along the way, like the screen which marionette players have in front of them, over which they show the puppets.”
“I see.”
“And do you see,” I said, “men passing along the wall carrying all sorts of vessels, and statues and figures of animals made of wood and stone and various materials, which appear over the wall? Some of them are talking, others silent.”
“You have shown me a strange image, and they are strange prisoners.”
“Like ourselves,” I replied; “and they see only their own shadows, or the shadows of one another, which the fire throws on the opposite wall of the cave?”
“True,” he said. “How could they see anything but the shadows if they were never allowed to move their heads?”
“And of the objects which are being carried in like manner they would only see the shadows?”
“Yes,” he said.
“And if they were able to converse with one another, would they not suppose that they were naming what was actually before them?”
“Very true.”
“And suppose further that the prison had an echo which came from the other side, would they not be sure to fancy when one of the passers-by spoke that the voice which they heard came from the passing shadow?”
“No question,” he replied.
“To them,” I said, “the truth would be literally nothing but the shadows of the images.”
“That is certain.”
“And now look again, and see what will naturally follow if the prisoners are released and disabused of their error. At first, when any of them is liberated and compelled suddenly to stand up and turn his neck round and walk and look towards the light, he will suffer sharp pains; the glare will distress him, and he will be unable to see the realities of which in his former state he had seen the shadows; and then conceive someone saying to him that what he saw before was an illusion, but that now, when he is approaching nearer to being and his eye is turned towards more real existence, he has a clearer vision—what will be his reply? And you may further imagine that his instructor is pointing to the objects as they pass and requiring him to name them—will he not be perplexed? Will he not fancy that the shadows which he formerly saw are truer than the objects which are now shown to him?”
“Far truer.”
“And if he is compelled to look straight at the light, will he not have a pain in his eyes which will make him turn away to take refuge in the objects of vision which he can see, and which he will conceive to be in reality clearer than the things which are now being shown to him?”
“True,” he said.
“And suppose once more that he is reluctantly dragged up a steep and rugged ascent, and held fast until he is forced into the presence of the sun himself, is he not likely to be pained and irritated? When he approaches the light his eyes will be dazzled, and he will not be able to see anything at all of what are now called realities.”
“Not all in a moment,” he said.
“He will require to grow accustomed to the sight of the upper world. And first he will see the shadows best, next the reflections of men and other objects in the water, and then the objects themselves; then he will gaze upon the light of the moon and the stars and the spangled heaven; and he will see the sky and the stars by night better than the sun or the light of the sun by day?”
“Certainly.”
“Last of he will be able to see the sun, and not mere reflections of him in the water, but he will see him in his own proper place, and not in another; and he will contemplate him as he is.”
“Certainly.”
“He will then proceed to argue that this is he who gives the season and the years, and is the guardian of all that is in the visible world, and in a certain way the cause of all things which he and his fellows have been accustomed to behold?”
“Clearly,” he said, “he would first see the sun and then reason about him.”
“And when he remembered his old habitation, and the wisdom of the den and his fellow-prisoners, do you not suppose that he would felicitate himself on the change, and pity them?”
“Certainly,” he would.
“And if they were in the habit of conferring honours among themselves on those who were quickest to observe the passing shadows and to remark which of them went before, and which followed after, and which were together; and who were therefore best able to draw conclusions as to the future, do you think that he would care for such honours and glories, or envy the possessors of them? Would he not say with Homer Better to be the poor servant of a poor master and to endure anything, rather than think as they do and live after their manner?”
“Yes,” he said, “I think that he would rather suffer anything than entertain these false notions and live in this miserable manner.”
“Imagine once more,” I said, “such an one coming suddenly out of the sun to be replaced in his old situation; would he not be certain to have his eyes full of darkness?”
“To be sure,” he said.
“And if there were a contest, and he had to compete in measuring the shadows with the prisoners who had never moved out of the den, while his sight was still weak, and before his eyes had become steady (and the time which would be needed to acquire this new habit of sight might be very considerable) would he not be ridiculous? Men would say of him that up he went and down he came without his eyes; and that it was better not even to think of ascending; and if any one tried to loose another and lead him up to the light, let them only catch the offender, and they would put him to death.”
“No question,” he said.
“This entire allegory,” I said, “you may now append, dear Glaucon, to the previous argument; the prison-house is the world of sight, the light of the fire is the sun, and you will not mis-apprehend me if you interpret the journey upwards to be the ascent of the soul into the intellectual world according to my poor belief, which, at your desire, I have expressed whether rightly or wrongly God knows. But, whether true or false, my opinion is that in the world of knowledge the idea of good appears last of all, and is seen only with an effort; and, when seen, is also inferred to be the universal author of all things beautiful and right, parent of light and of the lord of light in this visible world, and the immediate source of reason and truth in the intellectual; and that this is the power upon which he who would act rationally, either in public or private life must have his eye fixed.”
“I agree,” he said, “as far as I am able to understand you.”
“Moreover,” I said, “you must not wonder that those who attain to this beatific vision are unwilling to descend to human affairs; for their souls are ever hastening into the upper world where they desire to dwell; which desire of theirs is very natural, if our allegory may be trusted.”
“Yes, very natural.”
“And is there anything surprising in one who passes from divine contemplations to the evil state of man, misbehaving himself in a ridiculous manner; if, while his eyes are blinking and before he has become accustomed to the surrounding darkness, he is compelled to fight in courts of law, or in other places, about the images or the shadows of images of justice, and is endeavouring to meet the conceptions of those who have never yet seen absolute justice?”
“Anything but surprising,” he replied.
“Anyone who has common sense will remember that the bewilderments of the eyes are of two kinds, and arise from two causes, either from coming out of the light or from going into the light, which is true of the mind’s eye, quite as much as of the bodily eye; and he who remembers this when he sees anyone whose vision is perplexed and weak, will not be too ready to laugh; he will first ask whether that soul of man has come out of the brighter light, and is unable to see because unaccustomed to the dark, or having turned from darkness to the day is dazzled by excess of light. And he will count the one happy in his condition and state of being, and he will pity the other; or, if he have a mind to laugh at the soul which comes from below into the light, there will be more reason in this than in the laugh which greets him who returns from above out of the light into the den.”
“That,” he said, “is a very just distinction.”
“But then, if I am right, certain professors of education must be wrong when they say that they can put a knowledge into the soul which was not there before, like sight into blind eyes.”
“They undoubtedly say this,” he replied.
“Whereas our argument shows that the power and capacity of learning exists in the soul already; and that just as the eye was unable to turn from darkness to light without the whole body, so too the instrument of knowledge can only by the movement of the whole soul be turned from the world of becoming into that of being, and learn by degrees to endure the sight of being, and of the brightest and best of being, or in other words, of the good.”
“Very true.”
“And must there not be some art which will effect conversion in the easiest and quickest manner; not implanting the faculty of sight, for that exists already, but has been turned in the wrong direction, and is looking away from the truth?”
“Yes,” he said, “such an art may be presumed.”
“And whereas the other so-called virtues of the soul seem to be akin to bodily qualities, for even when they are not originally innate they can be implanted later by habit and exercise, the of wisdom more than anything else contains a divine element which always remains, and by this conversion is rendered useful and profitable; or, on the other hand, hurtful and useless. Did you never observe the narrow intelligence flashing from the keen eye of a clever rogue—how eager he is, how clearly his paltry soul sees the way to his end; he is the reverse of blind, but his keen eyesight is forced into the service of evil, and he is mischievous in proportion to his cleverness.”
“Very true,” he said.
“But what if there had been a circumcision of such natures in the days of their youth; and they had been severed from those sensual pleasures, such as eating and drinking, which, like leaden weights, were attached to them at their birth, and which drag them down and turn the vision of their souls upon the things that are below—if, I say, they had been released from these impediments and turned in the opposite direction, the very same faculty in them would have seen the truth as keenly as they see what their eyes are turned to now.”
Plato. The Republic, Book VII, in The Dialogues of Plato, Benjamin Jowett, trans. (New York, 1871).

Code of Hammurabi
Hammurabi
1792bc
According to its preface, the law code of Hammurabi (ca. 1792–1750 BC) was given to him by the gods “to destroy the wicked and the evil, so that the strong may not oppress the weak.”  It was one of the tools Hammurabi used to solidify his control over an extensive Babylonian (Amorite) empire which stretched from the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean.
Prologue
When Anu the Sublime, King of the Anunaki, and Bel, the lord of Heaven and earth, who decreed the fate of the land, assigned to Marduk, the over-ruling son of Ea, God of righteousness, dominion over earthly man, and made him great among the Igigi, they called Babylon by his illustrious name, made it great on earth, and founded an everlasting kingdom in it, whose foundations are laid so solidly as those of heaven and earth; then Anu and Bel called by name me, Hammurabi, the exalted prince, who feared god, to bring about the rule of righteousness in the land, to destroy the wicked and the evil-doers; so that the strong should not harm the weak; so that I should rule over the black-headed people like Shamash, and enlighten the land, to further the well-being of mankind.
Hammurabi, the prince, called of Bel am I, making riches and increase, enriching Nippur and Dur-ilu beyond compare, sublime patron of E-kur; who re-established Eridu and purified the worship of E-apsu; who conquered the four quarters of the world, made great the name of Babylon, rejoiced the heart of Marduk, his lord who daily pays his devotions in Saggil; the royal scion whom Sin made; who enriched Ur; the humble, the reverent, who brings wealth to Gish-shir-gal; the white king, heard of Shamash, the mighty, who again laid the foundations of Sippara; who clothed the gravestones of Malkat with green; who made E-babbar great, which is like the heavens, the warrior who guarded Larsa and renewed E-babbar, with Shamash as his helper; the lord who granted new life to Uruk, who brought plenteous water to its inhabitants, raised the head of E-anna, and perfected the beauty of Anu and Nana; shield of the land, who reunited the scattered inhabitants of Isin; who richly endowed E-gal-mach; the protecting king of the city, brother of the god Zamama; who firmly founded the farms of Kish, crowned E-me-te-ursag with glory, redoubled the great holy treasures of Nana, managed the temple of Harsag-kalama; the grave of the enemy, whose help brought about the victory; who increased the power of Cuthah; made all glorious in E-shidlam, the black steer, who gored the enemy; beloved of the god Nebo, who rejoiced the inhabitants of Borsippa, the Sublime; who is indefatigable for E-zida; the divine king of the city; the White, Wise; who broadened the fields of Dilbat, who heaped up the harvests for Urash; the Mighty, the lord to whom come scepter and crown, with which he clothes himself; the Elect of Ma-ma; who fixed the temple bounds of Kesh, who made rich the holy feasts of Nin-tu; the provident, solicitous, who provided food and drink for Lagash and Girsu, who provided large sacrificial offerings for the temple of Ningirsu; who captured the enemy, the Elect of the oracle who fulfilled the prediction of Hallab, who rejoiced the heart of Anunit; the pure prince, whose prayer is accepted by Adad; who satisfied the heart of Adad, the warrior, in Karkar, who restored the vessels for worship in E-ud-gal-gal; the king who granted life to the city of Adab; the guide of E-mach; the princely king of the city, the irresistible warrior, who granted life to the inhabitants of Mashkanshabri, and brought abundance to the temple of Shidlam; the White, Potent, who penetrated the secret cave of the bandits, saved the inhabitants of Malka from misfortune, and fixed their home fast in wealth; who established pure sacrificial gifts for Ea and Dam-gal-nun-na, who made his kingdom everlastingly great; the princely king of the city, who subjected the districts on the Ud-kib-nun-na Canal to the sway of Dagon, his Creator; who spared the inhabitants of Mera and Tutul; the sublime prince, who makes the face of Ninni shine; who presents holy meals to the divinity of Nin-a-zu, who cared for its inhabitants in their need, provided a portion for them in Babylon in peace; the shepherd of the oppressed and of the slaves; whose deeds find favor before Anunit, who provided for Anunit in the temple of Dumash in the suburb of Agade; who recognizes the right, who rules by law; who gave back to the city of Ashur its protecting god; who let the name of Ishtar of Nineveh remain in E-mish-mish; the Sublime, who humbles himself before the great gods; successor of Sumula-il; the mighty son of Sin-muballit; the royal scion of Eternity; the mighty monarch, the sun of Babylon, whose rays shed light over the land of Sumer and Akkad; the king, obeyed by the four quarters of the world; Beloved of Ninni, am I.
When Marduk sent me to rule over men, to give the protection of right to the land, I did right and righteousness in…, and brought about the well-being of the oppressed.
Code of Laws
  1.  If a man weave a spell and bring a charge of murder against another man and has not justified himself, the accuser shall be put to death.
  2.  If a man has put a spell upon an other man, and has not justified himself, the one who is charged with sorcery shall go to the holy river, he shall plunge into the holy river, and if the holy river overcomes him, his accuser shall take his estate. If the holy river shows that man to be innocent and has saved him, he who charged him with sorcery shall be put to death and the man who plunged into the river shall take the estate of him who brought the charge against him.
  8.  If a man has stolen ox or sheep or ass or pig or ship, whether from the temple or from the palace, he shall pay thirty-fold; if he stole from a commoner, he shall render tenfold. If the thief cannot pay, he shall be put to death.
  14. If a man has stolen the son of a freeman, he shall be put to death.
  15. If a man has helped a male or female palace slave, or a commoner’s male or female slave to escape out of the city gate, he shall be put to death.
  21. If a man has broken into a house, he shall be killed before the breach and walled in it.
  23. If the robber has not been caught, the man who has been despoiled shall recount before the god  what he has lost, and the city and governor in whose territory the robbery took place shall make good to him his loss.
  24. If a life was lost, the city and governor shall pay one mina of silver to his people.
  27. If a soldier or a constable disappears whilst on military service and they have given his field and his orchard to another and he has carried on his obligations, if he returns and regains his city, they shall restore his field and his orchard and he shall fulfill his obligations himself.
  48. If a man has a debt upon him and a thunderstorm ravaged his field or carried away the produce, or the corn has not grown for lack of water, in that year he shall make no return of corn to his creditor; he shall alter his contract-tablet and he shall not pay interest for that year.
  53. If a man has neglected to strengthen the dike of his canal, and a breach has opened in his dike, and the waters have ravaged the meadow, the man in whose dike the breach has been opened shall make good the corn that he caused to be lost.
  104.  If a merchant has lent a trader corn, wool, oil or any sort of goods to traffic with, the trader shall write down the price and pay it back; the trader shall take a sealed receipt of the price which he pays to the merchant.
  109.  If a wine merchant has collected outlaws in her house and has not seized those outlaws and driven them to the palace, that wine merchant shall be put to death.
  110.  If a nun, a lady of god, who is not living in a convent, has opened the door of a wine shop or entered the wine shop for a drink, that woman shall be burned.
  117.  If a debt came due against a man, and he has given his wife, his son, his daughter for the money, or handed himself over to work off the debt, for three years they shall work in the house of their buyer or exploiter, in the fourth year they shall be set free.
  128.  If a man has married a wife and has not drawn up a contract, that woman is no wife.
  129.  If the wife of a man has been caught lying with another man, they shall bind them and throw them into the waters.
  131.  If a wife has been accused by her husband and she has not been caught lying with another male, she shall swear by god and shall return to her house.
  132.  If a wife has the finger pointed at her on account of another male but has not been caught lying with another male, for the sake of her husband she shall throw herself into the holy river.
  133.  If a man has been taken captive and in his house there is maintenance, if his wife has gone out from her house and entered into the house of another, because that woman has not guarded her body and has entered the house of another, they shall prove it against that woman and throw her into the waters.
  134.  If a man has been taken captive and in his house there is no maintenance, and his wife has entered into the house of another, that woman has no blame.
  137.  If a man has decided to put away his concubine who has borne him children or his wife who has granted him children, to that woman he shall return her marriage portion and shall give her half of the field, orchard and goods, and she shall bring up her children. From the time that her children are grown up, from whatever is given to her children they shall give her a share like that of one son, and she shall marry the husband of her choice.
  138.  If a man has put away his bride who has not borne him children, he shall return her dowry and pay her the marriage portion which she brought from her father’s house, and shall put her away.
  141.  If the wife of a man who is living in the house of her husband has made up her mind to leave the house to engage in business and has acted the fool, neglecting the house and humiliating the husband, it shall be proved against her; and if her husband has said “I put her away,” he shall put her away and she shall go her way, and he shall not give her anything for her divorce.
  142.  If a woman hates her husband and has said “You shall not possess me,” they shall inquire into her record and if she has been economical and has no vice and her husband has gone out and greatly belittled her, that woman has no blame, she will take her marriage portion and go off to her father’s house.
  143.  If she has not been economical, a gadabout, has neglected her house and humiliated her husband, that woman they shall throw into the waters.
  153.  If a man’s wife has caused her husband to be killed on account of another man, they shall impale that woman on a stake.
  154.  If a man has known his daughter, that man shall be expelled from the city.
  157.  If a man, after his father, has lain in the bosom of his mother, they shall burn both of them together.
  195.  If a man has struck his father, his hand shall be cut off.
  196.  If a man has caused the loss of a gentleman’s eye, they shall cause him to lose one eye.
  200.  If a man has made the tooth of a man that is his equal fall out, they shall make his tooth fall out.
  201.  If he has made the tooth of a commoner fall out, he shall pay one third of a mina of silver.
  202.  If a man has struck the cheek of his superior, he shall be struck in the assembly with 60 strokes of a cowhide whip.
  203.  If a man of gentle birth has struck a man of gentle birth who is his equal, he shall pay one mina of silver.
  209.  If a man has struck a gentleman’s daughter and caused her to have a miscarriage, he shall pay ten shekels of silver for what was in her womb.
  210.  If that woman has died, they shall put to death his daughter. 
  211.  If by his blows he has caused the daughter of a commoner to have a miscarriage, he shall pay five shekels of silver.
  212.  If that woman has died, he shall pay half a mina of silver.
  213.  If he has struck a gentleman’s slave and caused a miscarriage, he shall pay two shekels of silver.
  214.  If that slave has died, he shall pay one third of a mina of silver.
  215.  If a doctor has treated a gentleman for a severe wound with a bronze lancet and has cured him, or has opened an abscess of the eye for a gentleman with the bronze lancet and has cured the eye of the gentleman, he shall take ten shekels of silver.
  218.  If the doctor has treated a gentleman for a severe wound with a lancet of bronze and has caused the gentleman to die or has opened an abscess of the eye of a gentleman with the bronze lancet and has caused the loss of the gentleman’s eye, they shall cut off his hands.
  229.  If a builder has built a house and not made his work strong and the house he built has fallen and so has caused the death of the owner of the house, that builder shall be put to death.
  230.  If he has caused the son of the owner of the house to die, they shall put to death the son of the builder.
  250.  If a wild bull in his charge has gored a man, and caused him to die, that case has no remedy.
  251.  If a man’s ox was inclined to gore and it was made known to him that this was so and he took no steps to tie him up or blunt his horns, and that ox has gored a man and caused him to die, he shall pay half a mina of silver for a gentleman, one third of a mina for a slave.
The Epilogue
Laws of justice which Hammurabi, the wise king, established. A righteous law, and pious statute did he teach the land. Hammurabi, the protecting king am I. I have not withdrawn myself from the men, whom Bel gave to me, the rule over whom Marduk gave to me, I was not negligent, but I made them a peaceful abiding-place. I expounded all great difficulties, I made the light shine upon them. With the mighty weapons which Zamama and Ishtar entrusted to me, with the keen vision with which Ea endowed me, with the wisdom that Marduk gave me, I have uprooted the enemy above and below, subdued the earth, brought prosperity to the land, guaranteed security to the inhabitants in their homes; a disturber was not permitted. The great gods have called me, I am the salvation-bearing shepherd, whose staff is straight, the good shadow that is spread over my city; on my breast I cherish the inhabitants of the land of Sumer and Akkad; in my shelter I have let them repose in peace; in my deep wisdom have I enclosed them. That the strong might not injure the weak, in order to protect the widows and orphans, I have in Babylon the city where Anu and Bel raise high their head, in E-Sagil, the Temple, whose foundations stand firm as heaven and earth, in order to bespeak justice in the land, to settle all disputes, and heal all injuries, set up these my precious words, written upon my memorial stone, before the image of me, as king of righteousness.
The king who rules among the kings of the cities am I. My words are well-considered; there is no wisdom like unto mine. By the command of Shamash, the great judge of heaven and earth, let righteousness go forth in the land: by the order of Marduk, my lord, let no destruction befall my monument. In E-Sagil, which I love, let my name be ever repeated; let the oppressed who has a case at law come and stand before this my image as king of righteousness; let him read the inscription and understand my precious words: the inscription will explain his case to him; he will find out what is just, and his heart will be glad, so that he will say:
“Hammurabi is a ruler who is as a father to his subjects, who holds the words of Marduk in reverence, who has achieved conquest for Marduk over the north and south, who rejoices the heart of Marduk, his lord, who has bestowed benefits forever and ever on his subjects, and has established order in the land.”
When he reads the record, let him pray with full heart to Marduk, my lord, and Zarpanit, my lady; and then shall the protecting deities and the gods, who frequent E-Sagil, graciously grant the desires daily presented before Marduk, my lord, and Zarpanit, my lady.
In future time, through all coming generations, let the king who may be in the land observe the words of righteousness which I have written on my monument; let him not alter the law of the land which I have given, the edicts which I have enacted; my monument let him not mar. If such a ruler have wisdom, and be able to keep his land in order, he shall observe the words which I have written in this inscription; the rule, statute, and law of the land which I have given; the decisions which I have made will this inscription show him; let him rule his subjects accordingly, speak justice to them, give right decisions, root out the miscreants and criminals from this land, and grant prosperity to his subjects.
Hammurabi, the king of righteousness, on whom Shamash has conferred right [or law] am I. My words are well-considered; my deeds are not equaled; to bring low those that were high; to humble the proud, to expel insolence. If a succeeding ruler considers my words, which I have written in this my inscription, if he do not annul my law, nor corrupt my words, nor change my monument, then may Shamash lengthen that king’s reign, as he has that of me, the king of righteousness, that he may reign in righteousness over his subjects. If this ruler do not esteem my words, which I have written in my inscription, if he despise my curses, and fear not the curse of god, if he destroy the law which I have given, corrupt my words, change my monument, efface my name, write his name there, or on account of the curses commission another so to do, that man, whether king or ruler, patesi, or commoner, no matter what he be, may the great god [Anu], the father of the gods, who has ordered my rule, withdraw from him the glory of royalty, break his scepter, curse his destiny.
May Bel, the lord, who fixes destiny, whose command can not be altered, who has made my kingdom great, order a rebellion which his hand cannot control; may he let the wind of the overthrow of his habitation blow, may he ordain the years of his rule in groaning, years of scarcity, years of famine, darkness without light, death with seeing eyes be fated to him; may he order with his potent mouth the destruction of his city, the dispersion of his subjects, the cutting off of his rule, the removal of his name and memory from the land.
May Belit, the great mother, whose command is potent in E-Kur, the mistress who harkens graciously to my petitions, in the seat of judgment and decision turn his affairs evil before Bel, and put the devastation of his land, the destruction of his subjects, the pouring out of his life like water into the mouth of King Bel. May Ea, the great ruler, whose fated decrees come to pass, the thinker of the gods, the omniscient, who makes long the days of my life, withdraw understanding and wisdom from him, lead him to forgetfulness, shut up his rivers at their sources, and not allow corn or sustenance for man to grow in his land.
May Shamash, the great judge of heaven and earth, who supports all means of livelihood, lord of life-courage, shatter his dominion, annul his law, destroy his way, make vain the march of his troops, send him in his visions forecasts of the uprooting of the foundations of his throne and of the destruction of his land. May the condemnation of Shamash overtake him forthwith; may he be deprived of water above among the living, and his spirit below in the earth.
May Sin, the lord of heaven, the divine father, whose crescent gives light among the gods, take away the crown and regal throne from him; may he put upon him heavy guilt, great decay, that nothing may be lower than he. May he destine him as fated, days, months, and years of dominion filled with sighing and tears, increase of the burden of dominion, a life that is like unto death.
May Adad, the lord of fruitfulness, ruler of heaven and earth, my helper, withhold from him rain from heaven, and the flood of water from the springs, destroying his land by famine and want; may he rage mightily over his city, and make his land into flood-hills.
May Zamama, the great warrior, the first-born son of E-Kur, who goes at my right hand, shatter his weapons on the field of battle, turn day into night for him, and let his foe triumph over him.
May Ishtar, the goddess of fighting and war, who unfetters my weapons, my gracious protecting spirit, who loves my dominion, curse his kingdom in her angry heart; in her great wrath change his grace into evil, and shatter his weapons on the place of fighting and war. May she create dis-order and sedition for him, strike down his warriors that the earth may drink their blood, and throw down the piles of corpses of his warriors on the field; may she not grant him a life of mercy, deliver him into the hands of his enemies, and imprison him in the land of his enemies.
May Nergal, the might among the gods, whose contest is irresistible, who grants me victory, in his great might burn up his subjects like a slender reed stalk, cut off his limbs with his mighty weapons, and shatter him like an earthen image.
May Nin-tu, the sublime mistress of the lands, the fruitful mother, deny him a son, vouchsafe him no name, give him no successor among men.
May Nin-karak, the daughter of Anu, who adjudges grace to me, cause to come upon his members in E-kur high fever, severe wounds that can not be healed, whose nature the physician does not understand, which he can not treat with dressing, which, like the bite of death, can not be removed, until they have sapped away his life.
May he lament the loss of his life-power, and may the great gods of heaven and earth, the Anunaki, altogether inflict a curse and evil upon the confines of the temple, the walls of this E-barra1, upon his dominion, his land, his warriors, his subjects, and his troops. May Bel curse him with the potent curses of his mouth that can not be altered, and may they come upon him forthwith.

Gilgamesh and Aga
unknown
unknown
Envoys of Aga, the son of En-me-barage-si, came from Kish to Gilgamesh in Unug. Gilgamesh presented the issue before the elders of his city, carefully choosing his words: “There are wells to be finished, many wells of the land yet to be finished; there are shallow wells of the land yet to be finished, there are wells to deepen and hoisting gear to be completed. We should not submit to the house of Kish! Should we not smite it with weapons?”
In the convened assembly, his city’s elders answered Gilgamesh: “There are indeed wells to be finished, many wells of the land yet to be finished; there are shallow wells of the land yet to be finished, there are wells to deepen and hoisting gear to be completed. So we should submit to the house of Kish. We should not smite it with weapons!” 
Gilgamesh, the lord of Kulaba, placing his trust in Inana, did not take seriously the advice of his city’s elders. Gilgamesh presented the issue again, this time before the able-bodied men of his city, carefully choosing his words: “There are wells to be finished, many wells of the land yet to be finished; there are shallow wells of the land yet to be finished, there are wells to deepen and hoisting gear to be completed. Never before have you submitted to the house of Kish. Should you not smite it with weapons?”
In the convened assembly, his city’s able-bodied men answered Gilgamesh: “Standing on duty and sitting in attendance, escorting the king’s son, and forever grasping the donkey’s reins—who has that much breath?”, as the saying goes. You old men should not submit to the house of Kish! Should we young men not smite it with weapons? The great gods created the structure of Unug, the handiwork of the gods, and of E-ana, the house lowered down from heaven. You watch over the great rampart, the rampart which An founded, the majestic residence which An established. You are its king and warrior, an exuberant person, a prince beloved of An. When Aga comes, what terror he will experience! That army is small, and scattered at the rear. Its men will be incapable of confronting us.” 
Then Gilgamesh, the lord of Kulaba, rejoiced at the advice of his city’s able-bodied men and his spirit brightened. He addressed his servant Enkidu: “On this account let the weaponry and arms of battle be made ready. Let the battle mace return to your side. May they create a great terror and radiance. When he comes, my great fearsomeness will overwhelm him. His reasoning will become confused and his judgment disarrayed.”
Not five, not ten days had passed when Aga, the son of En-me-barage-si, laid siege to Unug with his men. Unug’s reasoning became confused. Gilgamesh, the lord of Kulaba, addressed its warriors: “My warriors shall have the choice. Let someone with courage volunteer, ‘I shall go to Aga.’” 
Bir-ur-tura, his royal guard, spoke in admiration to his king: “I shall go to Aga so that his reasoning will become confused and his judgment disarrayed.” 
Bir-ur-tura went out through the city gate. As soon as Bir-ur-tura went out through the city gate, they captured him at the gate’s entrance, and then beat Bir-ur-tura’s entire length. He came into the presence of Aga and then spoke to Aga. Before he had finished speaking, an officer of Unug climbed up on the rampart and leaned out over the rampart. Aga saw him and then spoke to Bir-ur-tura: “Slave, is that man your king?”
“That man is not my king! Were that man my king, were that his angry brow, were those his bison eyes, were that his lapis lazuli beard, were those his elegant fingers, would he not cast down multitudes, would he not raise up multitudes, would multitudes not be smeared with dust, would not all the nations be overwhelmed, would not the land’s canal-mouths be filled with silt, would not the barges’ prows be broken, and would he not take Aga, the king of Kish, captive in the midst of his army?”
They hit him, they struck him. They beat Bir-ur-tura’s entire length. Gilgamesh climbed up on the rampart after the officer of Unug. His radiance overwhelmed Kulaba’s young and old. He armed Unug’s able-bodied men with battle maces and stationed them on the causeway at the city gate’s door. Only Enkidu went out through the city gate. Gilgamesh leaned out over the rampart. Looking up, Aga saw him: “Slave, is that man your king?”
“That man is indeed my king.” It was just as he had said: Gilgamesh cast down multitudes, he raised up multitudes, multitudes were smeared with dust, all the nations were overwhelmed, the land’s canal-mouths were filled with silt, the barges’ prows were broken, and he took Aga, the king of Kish, captive in the midst of his army.
Gilgamesh, the lord of Kulaba, spoke to Aga: “Aga my overseer, Aga my lieutenant, Aga my military commander! Aga gave me breath, Aga gave me life: Aga took a fugitive into his embrace, Aga provided the fleeing bird with grain.” 
The able-bodied men acclaimed Gilgamesh: “You watch over Unug, the handiwork of the gods, the great rampart, the rampart which An founded, the majestic residence which An established. You are its king and warrior, an exuberant person, a prince beloved of An.” Gilgamesh addressed Aga: “Before Utu, your former kindness is hereby repaid to you.’” He set Aga free to go to Kish. 
O Gilgamesh, lord of Kulaba, praising you is sweet.
The Electronic Text Corpus of Sumerian Literature, t.1.8.1.1
