103-104. The Confusion at Wittenberg.
unknown
unknown
  (a)  Letter of 25 Jan. 1522.  I would have you know that the University and the Town Council have agreed upon the way in which Mass should be celebrated in the parish church to which we all belong.  First will come the hymn with the Introit, Gloria in excelsis, Epistle, Gospel, and Sanctus.  Then follows the sermon, and afterwards the Mass as our God and Lord Jesus instituted it in coena.  The priest speaks the verba consecrationis aloud in German, and admonishes the people that to every one who feels the burden of sin and hungers and thirsts after God’s grace, the body and blood of the Lord will be administered.  When the people have communicated, Agnus Dei, Carmen [v. 1. Commun.] and Benedicamus Domino are sung.  The Canon has been upset.  For the future we will tolerate no beggar, be he monk or no.  The poor shall be provided for from the common purse. . . . They will not endure images in church, and in time will remove them.  Strong passages of Scripture are alleged against them. . . .’
  (b) Fröschel’s Preface.  These three men give out that no one should study or keep school, for Christ has forbidden all this in Matthew xxiii [8] with these words, ‘Be not ye called Rabbi’ or masters.  In consequence of this many men of talent about this time left this place and forsook their studies, who might have been useful to their country and countrymen.  Dr. Carlstadt went round to the houses of the townsmen, and asked them how they understood this or that passage in this or that prophet.  And when the simple townsmen wondered at his question and said to him, ‘Sir Doctor, how comes it that you learned men and doctors in Holy Scripture thus ask us poor, illiterate, unlearned folk such questions?  Ye should rather tell us the meaning,’ then Carlstadt answered them that God had hidden it from them, as the Lord Jesus himself says in Matt. xi [25] and Luke x [21]. . . .  Besides, these three persons began not only to storm against schools, but also against churches and images in churches, that they would cast these images out of the churches.  And they gave out that no learned man should be allowed as preacher or priest in the churches, but laymen and handicraftsmen, who were only able to read, as I have known many such persons who wished to be called and chosen to the office.

104-105. From the Translation of the New Testament.
unknown
unknown
  (a)  Preface to the Epistles of St. James and St. Jude, 1522.—All the genuine books of Holy Writ agree in this, that one and all they preach and treat of Christ.  This too is the true touchstone for testing all books, to see whether they treat of Christ or not, since all Scripture witnesses to Christ (Rom. iii. 21) and St. Paul desires not to know anything save Christ (I Cor. ii. 2).  Whatever does not teach Christ that is not apostolic, though St. Peter or St. Paul taught it.  Conversely, whatever preaches Christ, that were apostolic, though Judas, Annas, Pilate, and Herod had the doing of it (Walch, xiv. 149).
  (b)  Preface to the Exposition of I Peter, 1523:--Those apostles who treat oftenest and highest of how faith in Christ alone justifies, are the best Evangelists.  Therefore are St. Paul’s Epistles more a Gospel than Matthew, Mark, and Luke.  For these do not set down much more than the story of the works and miracles of Christ; but the grace which we receive through Christ, no one so boldly extols as St. Paul, especially in his letter to the Romans (Walch, ix. 626).
  (c)  Preface to the New Testament, 1524.—John’s Gospel, St. Paul’s Epistles, especially that to the Romans, and St. Peter’s First Epistle are the right kernel and marrow of all books. . . for in them thou findest written down not many works and miracles of Christ, but in a quite masterly way expounded how faith in Christ overcomes sin and death and hell, and gives life, righteousness, and peace.  Which is, as thou hast heard, the right kind of Gospel. . . .Therefore is St. James’ Epistle, in comparison with these, a mere letter of straw; for it has nothing evangelical about it (Walch, xiv. 104 sq.)

153. Correspondence of Bishop Brask with the King
unknown
1524
  (a)  The Bishop, 21 May.—‘By the allegiance which I owe you, I deem it my duty to urge you not to allow the sale of Luther’s books within the realm, nor give his pupils shelter or encouragement of any kind, till the coming council of the Church shall pass its judgment. . . .  I know not how your Grace can better win the love of God, as well as of all Christian Kings and Princes, than by restoring the Church of Christ to the state of harmony that it has enjoyed in ages past.’
  (b)  The King, 8 June.—‘Regarding your request that we forbid the sale of Luther’s writings, we know not by what right it could be done, for we are told his teachings have not yet been found by impartial judges to be false.  Moreover, since writings opposed to Luther have been circulated throughout the land, it seems but right that his too should be kept public, that you and other scholars may detect their fallacies and show them to the people.  Then the books of Luther may be condemned.  As to your charge that Luther’s pupils are given shelter at our court, we answer that they have not sought it.  If indeed they should, you are aware it is our duty to protect them as well as you.  If there be any in our protection whom you wish to charge, bring your accusation and give their names.’

183. The Proposition, or Speech from the Throne
unknown
25 June 1526
  First, it is the gracious and express will, desire, and command of our most gracious Lord, His Imperial and Royal Spanish Majesty aforesaid, that the Electors, Princes, and Estates of the Holy Empire, together with the aforementioned commissioners and deputies of His Majesty, should at this present Diet deliberate, consider, and finally by common conference resolve upon, measures, ways, and means whereby the Christian faith and the well-established good Christian practice and order of the Church in general may be maintained until the meeting of a free Council, and here among the members of the Holy Empire unity of each with all may be secured: how, moreover, transgressors may be punished for their offences and, should one forcibly resist the punishment, how the authorities may assist each other: so that the Imperial Edict resolved upon by the above commissioners, together with the Estates of the Empire, may be observed by each and all, and obtain immediate execution.

183-184. The declaration of the Cities
unknown
4 Aug. 1526.
  Most gracious, gracious, and worshipful Sirs,--The information which the Viceroy and Commissioners of His Imperial Majesty recently communicated, by word of mouth and then in writing, to your Electoral and Princely Graces and other the worshipful Estates of the Holy Empire, we the representatives of the Free Imperial Cities, have obediently received, together with the articles of the Imperial Instructions concerning our holy Christian faith.
  We observe that the said articles aim specially at this, that nothing in this Diet shall be undertaken or concluded to the injury of our holy Christian faith or to the laws or ancient customs of the Church, its doctrine, order, ceremonies, and usages: but that these shall, in accordance with His Majesty’s Edict at Worms, be, throughout the Empire, maintained, executed, and ordained to be used, with the proviso that His Imperial Majesty will shortly repair to Rome to His Holiness the Pope, and with him will, as is fitting, announce and proclaim a General Council and common assembly of Christendom.
  Now we, thee representatives of the Free Cities of the Empire, willingly obedient in all subjection to His Majesty, as our right, only, and natural lord, in all that may forward the peace and unity of the Holy Empire, acknowledge ourselves also bound thereto.  But your Electo9ral and Princely Graces know to what a great and grievous extent the errors, discords, and disagreements in the matter of the aforesaid articles, especially in respect of ceremonies and abuses, have of recent years increased and multiplied: and how impossible it has hitherto proved, and, as it may be presumed, will yet prove more impossible, to execute the Imperial Edict of Worms, as lately, at the Diet of Nürnberg, was by your Graces resolved in reply to the Papal Envoy.
  We, therefore, the representatives of the Free Cities, doubt not but that . . . His Imperial Majesty will himself graciously consider that it would be extremely grievous, in the matter of ceremonies and abuses, to persist in imposing the Edict of Worms until a General Council.
  Further, the date of His Majesty’s Instructions is the twenty-third day of March last, at which time His Majesty was at one with His Holiness the Pope.  But, as we are now informed, His Holiness has at this moment an army in the field against His Majesty.  For this and other reasons we cannot suppose that a General Council or other common assembly of Christendom can, as His Imperial Majesty intended, be proclaimed and brought together. . . .

185. The Recess of the Diet
unknown
27 Aug. 1526
  Thereupon have we [the Commissioners], the Electors, Princes, Estates of the Empire, and ambassadors of the same, now here at this present Diet, unanimously agreed and resolved, while awaiting the sitting of the Council or a national Assembly [i.e. without tarrying for the return of the deputation] with our subjects, on the matters which the Edict published by His Imperial Majesty at the Diet holden at Worms may concern, each one so to live, govern, and carry himself as he hopes and trusts to answer it to God and His Imperial Majesty.

230-233. Church Order of Brunswick
unknown
1528
  Before all things, it is necessary to provide for three things: first, to set up good schools for the children; next, to appoint preachers who shall deliver God’s word pure to the people, and to secure the teaching of Latin and the exposition of holy Scripture for the learned; thirdly, to furnish Common Chests with the Church goods and other offerings from which the service of the church may be kept up and the needs of the poor relieved
  . . . .How necessary these first three things are, to set up schools, to ordain preachers, and to maintain both them and the poor out of the Common Chests is hereinafter set forth; and how not only Christians but all reasonable and fair-minded people must acknowledge such provision to be right. . . .
  First, of the Poor-Chests.  In all large parishes there shall openly stand a Common Chest for the indigent, the poor, and others in need.  To it shall come all free-will offerings which men shall put therein throughout the year, as each is disposed; item, all bequests and benefactions: item, the customary offerings on St. Auctor’s day. . .; item, what men have hitherto vainly offered for the dead; item, what they have also offered when a bride comes to church. . .; item, if any one wishes to have the bells rung at a death
  . . . the money for the ringing (save what is due to the sexton) shall be put into the Poor-Chest; item, whatever pious Christian people can devise for the help of these chests shall belong thereto; item, the Deacons of the Poor shall . . . go round on holydays before and after the sermon in church with bags whereon shall be a little bell so that they need not ask but that the people shall hear that they are there. . .and preachers shall in their sermons recommend such service of the poor as Divine Service. . . .For these chests there shall be chosen three Deacons by the Council and by the members of the Commune in the district. . . .The Deacons shall keep an account of their receipts and expenditure, and a list of the names and houses of those who from week to week are in need of assistance, so that their reckoning may be the simpler and clearer.  When they have made their reckoning with the Council and the Ten Men, they shall bring the balance that remains from each parish to some particular place, and an entry shall be made of what each parish brings: and such money shall be kept in readiness for use in special emergencies, such as the plague, or to buy corn. . . .Every Sunday, or other appointed day in the week, the Deacons shall meet together in each parish to distribute to the poor according to need, and to consider what is necessary for each sick or poor man.  And when there is no money there, or too little, the preacher shall warn the people to come to the assistance of the Common Chest. . . .
  Of the Church-Chest.  In each large parish there shall also stand a Church-Chest in the sacristy, wherein the overseers or Treasurers shall place the alms of their church, as follows:--
  Memorials founded at the church, kalends, and what are called benefactorum, and all benefices shall, as they become vacant, be placed therein.  The register and all that they shall receive, in whatever wise and from what source so ever, shall by  the Honourable Council be handed over to the Treasurers.  They shall have power over all church goods, as hitherto churchwardens have had, and shall bring them into their Common Chests. . . . To these chests shall also belong the Ember-penny.  Wherefore the preachers shall from the pulpit diligently require the Ember-penny of the people, on the Sunday before the offering-day. . . . We doubt not too that the worshipful Guilds and Brotherhoods will bring into these Chests all that hitherto they have spent upon candles, memorials, vigils, and Masses for the dead in church.  Item, absentee holders of benefices shall bring into these Chests all that formerly they gave in fees to the celebrant for reading Mass: and, further, whatever they provided in the way of wine and oblations for the Sacrifice shall also be placed therein.  Item, whatever in any parish the council of the district may devote thereto and whatever else may be arranged with the parish priest, shall be for the good of this Chest. . . .For these Church-Chests four deacons or overseers shall be appointed by the Council and the members of the Commune who shall collect and demand all that is ordered, answer for everything, and give receipts for themselves and their successors.  And for this purpose they shall have a ledger wherein all necessary things shall be entered and duly kept.
  These deacons or treasurers shall pay the stipends to the preachers of their churches every quarter, as also to the sacristans and the organists.  They shall also provide and maintain a dwelling near the church for their preachers, and, where they are willing and able to do so, for their schoolmaster who is appointed in their church to sing with the children, in case he wishes to marry and to keep house. . . .They shall also keep the churches in repair and provide what is needful therein.  These four persons shall have authority from the Commune in company with the Council to appoint a preacher, as is above set down, one of the four being a member of the Council. . . .These four treasurers shall reckon up year by year with the Honourable Council and the Ten Men: and anything over from all the parishes shall be collected together in a particular place and in a special chest, as is provided in the case of the Poor-Chests. . . .

256-257. Campeggio’s Instructions to the Emperor
unknown
Jan. 1530.
  ‘The Cardinal remarks,’ says Ranke, ‘that in conformity with the position he holds and with the Commission of the Apostolic See, he would proceed to set forth the measures which, according to his judgment, ought to be adopted.  He describes the state of affairs in the following manner:--
  “In certain parts of Germany all the Christian rites which were given to us by the ancient holy fathers have been abrogated in accordance with the suggestions of thee scoundrels; the sacraments are no longer administered, vows are not observed, marriages are contracted irregularly and within the degree prohibited by the laws. . . .”’
  ‘He reminds the Emperor that “this sect” would not procure him any increase of power, as he had been promised, and assures him of his own spiritual aid in the event of his adopting the counsels suggested:--
  “And I, if there shall be need, will pursue them with ecclesiastical censures and penalties, omitting nothing that it may be needful to do.  I will deprive the beneficed heretics of their benefices, and will separate them by excommunications from the Catholic flock.  Your Highness also, with your just and awful Imperial Ban, will subject them to such and so horrible an extermination that either they shall be constrained to return to the holy Catholic faith, or shall be utterly ruined and despoiled both of goods and life.  And if any there be, which God forbid, who shall obstinately persevere in that diabolical course. . .Your Majesty will then take fire and sword in hand, and will radically extirpate these noxious and venomous weeds. . . .
  “It will be well and to the purpose that when this magnificent and Catholic undertaking shall have been put firmly and directly on its way, there should be chosen, some few days after, efficient and holy inquisitors who, with the utmost diligence and assiduity, should go about seeking and inquiring if there be any (but far be it from them) who persist in these diabolical and heretical opinions, nor will by any means abandon them. . . in which case they shall be castigated and punished according to the rule and practice observed in Spain with regard to the Moors. . . .”’

257-258. The Imperial Summons to the Diet
unknown
21 Jan. 1530
  To the Most Noble John, Duke of Saxony, &c., Charles, by the Grace of God, Roman Emperor Elect &c. . . . For the good purposes aforesaid we have resolved to undertake a general Diet and assembly, and, on the 8th of April next ensuing, to hold the same in our Imperial City of Augsburg: by which time we hope that we shall have settled affairs in Italy so as to be present in person on that day, as we have finally resolved to do.  This day, then, we hereby announce to you, our Well-beloved, commanding you by the authority of our Roman Empire and by the duty wherewith you are bound to us and to the Empire, straitly bidding and willing you to appear that day in person at Augsburg, and together with us and other our Electors, Princes, and Estates of the Holy Empire, whom we have summoned in like manner, to assist in undertaking, debating, resolving, and concluding how weighty provision may be made for the removal of the grievous burden and invasion into Christendom of the aforesaid Turks, with good deliverance, defence, and steady help according to need, in addition to the measures formerly taken in that behalf: and, further, how, in the matter of errors and divisions concerning the holy faith and the Christian religion we may and should deal and resolve, and so bring it about, in better and sounder fashion, that divisions may be allayed, antipathies set aside, all past errors left to the judgment of our Saviour, and every care taken to give a charitable hearing to every man’s opinions, thoughts, and notions, to understand them, to weigh them, to bring and reconcile men to a unity in Christian truth, and to dispose of everything that has not been rightly explained or treated of on the one side or the other....

258. The advice of Dr. Brück
unknown
March 1530
  Inasmuch as His Imperial Majesty’s summons desires that every man’s opinion and mind should have a hearing, it appears to us a good thing that the opinion wherein our side has hitherto stood and persisted, should be duly collected together in writing with well-grounded justification of the same from Holy Scripture, so that one may have it ready in writing to start with: since it is hardly likely that, in the handling of the affair, the preachers as well as the Estates will be allowed to take part. . . .

289-293. The representations of the Legate
unknown
July 1530
  Most Invincible, Imperial, and Catholic Majesty!  Although I am sure that it is unnecessary for me to state my opinion to your Catholic Majesty in the reply to be given to the proposition made by certain illustrious princes regarding the matters of the faith and our holy religion, seeing that by your singular wisdom and by your exceptional judgment, in addition to the faithful and excellent counsels of many of the illustrious Prince-Electors and other Princes and Lords, you can without me supply what is needed; yet, at your Highness’ command, at the wish also of the aforesaid illustrious Princes, and since it is, moreover, not incompatible with my duty through the office I hold, I will with all respect say what I think, subject, however, to the correction of Your Majesty and of any other who holds a better and sounder opinion.
  In the first place, I say that in order to facilitate this business it will be very much to the point if your Catholic Majesty with your very great authority, and then with the help of such Catholic Princes as shall seem best to you, should with every care try and strive to bring into the right and Catholic road some of these Princes, even if you cannot bring all who have subscribed to these articles and propositions; and also some of the imperial Cities, which indeed, as your Serene Highness will see in the reply which will be given to you, being desirous of persevering in the assertion of the said articles proposed, have strayed far and entirely from the truth and the sincere faith of Christ.
  In the second place, there being in this city about twenty most excellent doctors and theologians of holy, good, and exemplary life, Your Highness can have them summoned or, if it be your pleasure, I will undertake the task of calling them and giving them the articles proposed which we would have them with all care read and study; and, after they have exercised all prudence, moderation, and Christian charity, let them, as soon as they can, proceed in the manner set forth below—that is to say, let them first extract the heads and assertions contained in the said articles or propositions, and not only those which are expressed and are openly called propositions but also those which are surreptitiously comprised therein.
  Then, all such as are Catholic and well founded on the Gospel, sacred Scripture, and Doctrine of the holy doctors, and are approved by the holy Church, if such there be—let them be pleased to accept, praise, and approve: but such as shall be found to be heretical, false, seditious, disorderly, erroneous, scandalous, and offensive to pious Catholic ears, let them demolish, destroy, and totally annihilate, after having first shown them whence they have derived their assertions, and how in former times they were put forth by other heretics, diligently examined by the holy Councils, and finally justly condemned and burnt together with the same heretics, in order that every one should understand and know that there was to be no more disputing or gainsaying or reviving of doubt about that which so justly, with excellent reasons and true understanding of the holy Scripture, had been reprobated and condemned.  Which thing can only be done with the greatest danger, as Saint Maximus, the bishop, says in one of his sermons:--‘Noverimus itaque quia non sine magno discrimine de religionis veritate disputamus, quam tantorum sanguine confirmatam videmus.  Magni periculi res est si post prophetarum oracula, post apostolorum testimonia, post martyrum vulnera, veterem fidem quasi novellam discutere praesumas, et post tam manifestos duces in errore permaneas, et post morientium sudores otiosa disputatione contendas.’  The Imperial Law also declares the same thing:--‘Nemo: c. de summa Trinitate et fide Catholica; Nemo clericus vel militans vel alterius cuiuslibet conditionis de fide Christiana publice turbis coadunatis et audientibus tractare conetur in posterum, ex hoc tumultus et perfidiae occasionem requirens.  Nam et iniuriam facit iudicio reverendissimae Synodi, si quis semel iudicata ac recte disposita revolvere ac publice disputare contendit, cum ea quae nunc de Christiana fide a sacerdotibus qui Chalcedone convenerunt per nostra praecepta statuta sunt, iuxta apostolicas expositiones et instituta sanctorum patrum trecentorum decem et octo et centum quinquaginta, in hac regia Urbe definita esse noscuntur.  Nam in contemptores huius legis poena non deerit, quia non solum contra fidem vere expositam veniunt, sed etiam Iudaeis et paganis ex huiusmodi certamine profanant veneranda mysteria.  Igitur si clericus erit qui publice tractare de religione ausus fuerit, a consortio clericorum removebitur; si vero militia praeditus sit, singulo spoliabitur: ceteri etiam huiusmodi criminis rei, siquidem liberi sint, de hac sacratissima Urbe expellentur pro vigore iudiciario etiam competentibus suppliciis subiugandi; sin vero servi, severissimis animadversionibus plectentur.’
  And inasmuch as in the aforesaid articles and propositions it is stated that their preachers have neither preached, nor said, nor written, many things which are attributed to them—which, however, is false—it is, in my opinion, advisable that the above-mentioned doctors and theologians should note the places where they have said, taught, and preached the contrary, and the many contradictions and scandals disseminated in the Church of Christ, to the destruction of quiet, peace, and holy religion; and, for better satisfaction, let their authorities be adduced by our people, and let them show the true sense and meaning which with their erudition, will be an easy matter.  Furthermore, it would appear to me necessary for the clearer elucidation of the truth that the aforesaid doctors should propound and set forth as against their heretical, false, seditious, disorderly, erroneous, and scandalous articles, the true articles and propositions—such as may be suited and attuned to the pious ears of Catholics; and should confirm and stablish them by holy Scripture and the authority of holy doctors approved by the Church.
  When the said things shall have been drawn up in due and full form, as well in German as in Latin even as was done by them, I think that the whole should be presented to your Catholic Majesty, who, if it seem good to you, will be able to summon all the Catholic Princes and, with their counsel and consent, deliberate whether to convoke the whole Diet and let these things be publicly read and understood by all.
  And since, O Sacred Majesty, after the reading of the aforesaid Catholic and true propositions and articles, it may very easily happen that they should ask for a copy, and time in which to answer, it would be well first to consult and deliberate with the aforesaid Catholic Christian Princes as to what should be done and what course should be followed in that case.  And, although I do not doubt that your Highness and the illustrious Princes would adopt the best course and measures, yet with all due reverence, and subject to your correction, I will state my opinion.  Your Highness must be aware that it was, and always will be, in the nature of heretics to be obstinate and hard, never willing to give way or consent to reason, nor to any authority, however clear and approved.  This I am convinced will be the same with these, from the protestation they make and propound at the beginning.  For though they try to cover it up and soften it down with fine words, yet it seems to me to say nothing else in the end than that, if the matter is not settled to their liking, they mean to persist in their opinion and in their appeal to a future Council—not because they are to be determined, either as regards belief or giving way, by any Council; but that they may be able to persist in their wrong opinions and evade the coming of Your Highness for their great good, and in this way (which God avert) reduce all Germany to their perverse opinions, fill it with tumults and seditions, as they have done up to now, and so be able also to contaminate the rest of Christendom.
  Wherefore I should think that your Highness and the Catholic Princes should consider together the two cases which I will now state.  The first is that, if they should accept and approve the Christian assertions and such things as shall be ruled by the aforesaid doctors and theologians (which I do not believe, and would to God I might be wrong); in this case let them consult and deliberate as to the ways and means to be observed and followed, and how matters should be brought to a conclusion so that men may live in a Christian way and in the truth of the Faith—which, if God grant us this grace, it will then be easy to consult and deliberate upon,.
  The second is that of their not consenting to or accepting the sound counsel and doctrine which shall be shown them (which I greatly fear), but rather obstinately insisting upon wishing to reply, and in these disputations and vain controversies prolonging matters with a wish never to end them, as I am sure they intend to do.  In this case let your Majesty be well advised not to consent to it, nor, on this point, to promise or concede to them anything whatever, because you would then enter into a labyrinth from which you could never emerge any more, and so they would have gained their will: which is, by such means, to spin the matter out so that the Diet which, owing to the very great expense, cannot last very long, may come to an end with the matter still not settled.  But let your Catholic Majesty with your illustrious Princes and good and true Christians, after having established a complete understanding and confederation, prepare to decide thoroughly to extirpate these heresies, proceeding against them with order and system by means of reason and justice, using you your temporal arms and I the spiritual, and thus zealously punish them as is right; which, with the help of God, will be easy for you.  And in this glorious, holy, and very truly Catholic undertaking, your Serene Highness would show yourself to all the world to be as in name so in deeds, as I told you before, the true and undoubted successor of that Charles the Great amongst whose other greatest undertakings there still resounds the fame of the conquest he made of the Saxons, whereby was then established the holy and Catholic Christian Faith.  And Your Serenity may be sure that, this enterprise having been dispatched, if you wish shortly to take the field—as, I think, you will wish it because you ought to wish it on account of the very high position and office you hold—an ample, quick, and broad way will be made to victories against the Turk, and against all such as may wish or presume to oppose your holy and virtuous works.
  As for the abuses and disorders, once the affair of the Faith is settled as was said above, it will then be the right time for Your Majesty to try and contrive that all should return to the true path and way, and become true and Catholic Christians, in which I also, as long as my strength lasts, promise not to fail as to the duty of my office and the place I hold.  Nothing else occurs to me but once more to submit all I have said to the most wise counsel and judgment of your Majesty, to whom I humbly commend myself.
        Your humble servant,
          CAR. CAMPEGIUS LEGATUS.

301. The Schmalkaldic League
unknown
27 Feb. 1531
  We, John, by the grace of God, Archmarshal and Elector of the Holy Roman Empire and John Frederick, father and son, Dukes of Saxony &c.; Philip, Otto, and the brothers Ernest and Francis, all Dukes of Brunswick and Lüneburg; Philip, Landgrave of Hesse, &c.; Wolfgang, Prince of Anhalt, &c.; the brothers Gebhard and Albert, Counts of Mansfeld; and the Burgomaster and Council of the undermentioned cities of Upper Germany, Saxony, and the Sea, viz., Strassburg, Ulm, Constance, Reutlingen, Memmingen, Lindau, Biberach, Isny, Lübeck, Magdeburg and Bremen, do all men to wit:--
  Whereas it is altogether likely that those who have the pure Word of God preached in their territory, and thereby have abolished many abuses, are to be prevented by force from continuing this service so pleasing to God;
  And whereas it is the duty of every Christian government not only to have the Word of God preached to its subjects but also, as far as possible, to prevent their being compelled to fall away from it;
  Now we, solely for the sake of our own defence and deliverance, which both by human and divine right is permitted to every one, have agreed that whenever any one of us is attacked on account of the Word of God and the doctrine of the Gospel, or anything connected therewith, all the others shall immediately come to his assistance, as best they can, and help to deliver him. . . .

345-346. Political rivalries
Farnese
28 April
background: From a letter of Contarini to Card. 
  Eck was first invited by the Landgrave to talk with him; and he has told me that he finds him difficult on three points: de connubio sacerdotum, de primatu Pontificis et de communione sub utraque specie.  He has also been with the Elector of Brandenburg; and he has told me that he finds him stiff on three points: de Missa quod sit sacrificium, de connubio sacerdotum et de communio9ne sub utraque specie.  As for the primacy of the Pope, he tells me that the margrave does not see the least difficulty in the world: nay, he says it appears to him most necessary, there being among Christians one faith and one church.
  Monsignor Granvella talking with the Nuncio and me in my room spoke of the infinite danger there is lest, if some beginning be not made at once, this sect should be disseminated and spread broadcast in Flanders and other countries.  He asserted to me with an oath that he had in his hands letters of the most Christian King to the Protestant Princes exhorting them by no means to make agreement with the Catholics, and avowing himself desirous to learn their opinions which were not displeasing to him.
  (b)  From Beccatelli’s Life of Contarini, § 18.
  Now the devil, who always sets himself in opposition to good works, so wrought that when this report of the peace that was being prepared between Catholics and Protestants got about, the enemies of the Emperor, whether in or out of Germany, dreading the power he would obtain in the union of all Germany, began to sow the tares of discord among the divines of the Conference: and, on the other hand, in Rome, which was always a land of liberty, some who saw with ill will the greatness of the Cardinal said that he had been accepted in Germany, because of the advances and concessions he had made to the Lutherans, which he ought not to have made.  This was mere calumny.  but with the malicious lies have always more force than the truth: and so not only in Rome but throughout Italy they disseminated this report.  The Cardinal, however, took as little notice of it as of a pasquinade, when it came to his ears as far off as Germany.  But he was truly sorry that carnal envy should have interrupted the happy progress made by the divines of the Conference.

363-364. The Peace of Augsburg
Augsburg
25 Sept. 1555
  § 15.  In order to bring peace into the holy Empire of the Germanic Nation between the Roman Imperial Majesty and the Electors, Princes, and Estates: let neither his Imperial Majesty nor the Electors, Princes, &c., do any violence or harm to any estate of the Empire on account of the Augsburg Confession, but let them enjoy their religious belief, liturgy and ceremonies as well as their estates and other rights and privileges in peace; and complete religious peace shall be obtained only by Christian means of amity, or under threat of the punishment of the imperial ban.
  § 16.  Likewise the Estates espousing the Augsburg Confession shall let all the Estates and Princes who cling to the old religion live in absolute peace and in the enjoyment of all their estates, rights and privileges.
  § 17.  However, all such as do not belong to the two above named religions shall not be included in the present peace but be totally excluded from it.
  § 18.  And since it has proved to be matter of great dispute what was to happen with the bishoprics, priories, and other ecclesiastical benefices of such Catholic priests as would in course of time abandon the old religion, we have in virtue of the powers of Roman Emperors ordained as follows: Where an archbishop, bishop or prelate or any other priest of our old religion shall abandon the same, his archbishopric, bishopric, prelacy, and other benefices, together with all their income and revenues which he has so far possessed, shall be abandoned by him without any further objection or delay.  The chapters and such as are entitled to it by common law or the custom of the place shall elect a person espousing the old religion, who may enter on the possession and enjoyment of all the rights and incomes of the place without any further hindrance and without prejudging any ultimate amicable settlement of religion.
  § 19.  Some of the abbeys, monasteries, and other ecclesiastical estates having been confiscated and turned into churches, schools, and charitable institutions, it is herewith ordained that such estates as their original owners had not possessed at the time of the treaty of Passau shall be comprised in the present treaty of peace.
  § 20.  The ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the Augsburg Confession, doctrine, appointment of ministers, church usages, orders, and ceremonies hitherto practised (but apart from all the rights of the Electors, Princes and Estates, Colleges and Monasteries, to taxes in money or tithes) shall from now cease, and the Augsburg Confession shall be left to the free and untrammelled enjoyment of their religion, ceremonies, appointment of ministers, as is stated in a subsequent separate article, until the final settlement of religion shall take place.
  § 23.  No Estate shall try to persuade the subjects of other Estates to abandon their religion nor protect them against their own magistrates.  Such as had from olden times the rights of patronage are not included in the present article.
  § 24.  In case our subjects, whether belonging to the old religion or to the Augsburg Confession, should intend leaving their homes, with their wives and children, in order to settle in another place, they shall neither be hindered in the sale of their estates after due payment of the local taxes nor injured in their honour. . . .

366-368. The Diet of Baden
Baden
2 Aug. 1512
  (a)  At this Diet appeared the Bailiff of Lorraine, and in the name of the Duke informed them as follows:--It was rumoured that certain of the Confederates were marching through his territory upon the King of France, and that the Duke had given them his permission to pass through.  The latter statement was incorrect; the passage had taken place without his knowledge and consent; and no sooner had he received information of it than he had issued strict orders forbidding such passage; and in the case of some of his own subjects, who notwithstanding were bent upon marching towards France, had had them arrested and was about to punish them.  He entreated the Confederation to have him excused, and to believe that he was in no way desirous of setting himself against them.  Further, it was rumoured that his brother was with the King of France.  That was true.  At the appprtionment of the Duchy, that portion had fallen to his brother which was under vassalage to the King of France.  He could not therefore avoid his obligations of fealty; and this the Duke begged the Confederation to bear in mind.
  (b)  The Pope bestowed upon the Honourable Confederation, in consideration of their good and true services, complimentary gifts of sword, hat, and two banners.  Next day, it was to be decided where these presents were to be kept for the benefit of the Confederation as a whole.
  (c)  To-day appeared an embassy from the King of Spain with a request that the Confederation would make alliance with the Pope, the King of Spain, and the Doge of Venice, and conclude the same either in perpetuity or, failing this, for three years, or for so long as the alliance between the three should continue.  Would the Confederation also use its influence to make up the quarrel between the Emperor and Venice, so that then all five states might enter into a common unity and alliance?  It would be well to take this matter in hand at once; for the King of Spain was keeping his troops in the field at such heavy outlay as would soon become intolerable.
  (d)  Then there appeared, as ambassador from the Duke of Savoy, the Dean of Colmar, who requested that the setting up of a league between the Confederation and the Duke might be hastened.  He defended the Duke against the charge, that he was against us as a dependent of the King of France and was rendering him assistance, by a further request that if we would only allow him to negotiate a peace between the King and us, it could be done with goodwill and good faith.  An answer is to be given to-morrow.
  (e)  The ambassador of Savoy also drew attention amongst other things to the fact that the Cardinal of Sitten lay with the Papal troops in Savoy, a thing which could not happen without damage to the poor people.  At his request, letters were sent to the Cardinal requiring that he should withdraw and provision his troops elsewhere, and that those passing through Savoy should make due payment and the people receive no damage; for the Duke had already paid us a considerable sum of money and had still to pay more.  If then any damage came to his subjects, it would be impossible for him to fulfil his obligations.  The envoys, who were on their way to the Cardinal about ordnance, were also to make these representations by word of mouth.
  (f)  A proposal was also introduced about the Fair of Lyons, how to transfer it thence to Geneva.  As great profits were expected therefrom, advice was taken about it with the Emperor’s ambassadors.  They undertook to bring the matter before His Imperial Majesty, in the hope of a gracious answer on his part.  The Spanish and Milanese ambassadors, who were also consulted in this case, were favourable to the scheme.
  (g)  The Imperial ambassadors requested that we would ‘sit down with them and make plans for a campaign against Burgundy’, and would also maintain a loyal regard for his Imperial Majesty.  Answer was made to them that for the present we were too busy with other concerns and had no authority for this; but that we would take their request home and make answer at the next Diet.
  (h)  ‘Whereas upon the conquest of the Duchy of Milan, this Diet was appointed here in the town of Baden to advise and resolve in what manner the young Duke of Milan should be installed in the Dukedom in accordance with certain proposals and conferences which took place at a former Diet in that behalf; and whereas at this Diet here in Baden there have appeared their Excellencies the Imperial Ambassadors and their Worships the Envoys of the Duchy of Milan, and much advice has been taken in regard to the installation of Duke Maximilian; certain articles have at last been drawn up, notice of the same has been given on either side, and each envoy has received a copy of the articles aforesaid to bring the same before his Sovereign and Lord, to advise thereon, and at the Diet appointed to be held again here in Baden at the inn on the Sunday after St. Verena’s day next [5 Sept.] in the evening, finally to answer and conclude the matter, seeing that as the ambassadors are of opinion the business may brook no further delay.—Resolved, to bring up, at the Diet appointed, all instruments, new and old, hitherto occurring between the Dukes of Milan and our Confederation, so that they may be looked into and a conclusion come to as to what seems most suitable for present relations.’
  (i)  An embassy from the Signory of Venice applied for a league with us.  We answered that we were in alliance with his Imperial Majesty; and that since he and Venice had some differences with each other, we could not, till these were settled, enter into an alliance with Venice.  But we offered our mediation, and the Imperial Ambassadors undertook to bring this offer to the notice of their Master, and to give us a reply at the next Diet.  The Venetian envoys might therefore report our intention to their Signory; and, as soon as we had the consent of both parties, we would with all speed get to work.  Should the attempt succeed, Venice might obtain a reply in terms favourable to the alliance.

368. The League with Appenzell
Appenzell
17 Dec. 1513
  With unimportant differences follows, almost word for word, the League with Schaffhausen.  It opens with the mention, as contracting parties, of:--
  ‘We, the Burgomasters, Bailiffs, Magistrates, Councillors, Burgesses, People and whole Communes [Gemeinden] of Zürich, Bern, Luzern, Uri, Schwyz, Unterwalden above and below the Forest, Zug with the outer district thereto belonging, Glarus, Basel, Freiburg, Solothurn, and Schaffhausen on the one part: and we, the High Bailiff, Council, People and whole Commune of Appenzell on the other . . .’
  In the article defining the assistance to be rendered, the liabilities of the Confederation are limited, in the case of the Appenzellers, by the following supplement:-
  ‘And though [the Confederation] shall be under no obligation to render us [Appenzellers] any assistance but within the borders of our own territory, they shall do that gladly.’

370. Prohibition of Pensions
unknown
21 July 1503
  That no one in the Confederation, be he burgher countryman or subject, spiritual person or layman, of the nobles or the commons, rich or poor, of what rank or condition soever, shall from this day forward have or receive from emperors, kings, princes, lords or cities, from powers spiritual or temporal, or from any one whomsoever, any pension, service-money, provision, allowance, salary, gift or present, whether directly or through his wife, children, friends, servants or others, so that it should in any way come to his own use, whether secretly or openly. . . .

371-373. The Federal Constitution.
unknown
unknown
  The Swissers, which are those people whom the ancients called Helvetians, have their habitations in the highest mountains of Jura, of Valesia, and S. Godar: and are naturally valiant, warlike, and rude, and for the sterilitie of the country, rather shepheards than tillers of the ground.  They have been in times past under the subjection of the Dukes of Austria, whose jurisdiction they have shaken off many years since.  They govern themselves, without any dependencie of either  Emperors, Kings or other Princes.  They are divided into thirteen communalties, which they call Cantons, each of them being severally governed by their particular magistrates, laws and ordinances.  They hold their Council every year or more often if occasion require, wherein they dispute of universal affairs, their assemblies and meetings being not subject to certainty of places, but referred as best pleaseth the Deputies of every Canton.  They call those assemblies dyots or journeys, according to the custom of the Germains: wherein they deliberate of peace, of war, of confederations, of the demands of such as make instance to levie soldiers by public decree, or that such as are willing may be permitted: and of such things as appertaine to their public good.  When they agree by public decree to deliver soldiers, the Cantons chose among themselves a Captain general, to whom they give the banner with the Ensign and name public.  Their unit and the glory of their arms hath made famous the name of this so savage and barbarous a nation: insomuch as by their natural valour, joined to due discipline and order, they have not only at all times valiantly defended their own country, but have also employed themselves in foreign wars, and performed singular feats of arms to their perpetual praise; which had been without all comparison far greater, if they had employed their forces for their own jurisdiction, and not been mercenary for the increasing of the dominion of strangers, or if they had set before their eyes an end more noble than the desire of money, by the love whereof suffering themselves to be corrupted, they have lost the occasion to be feared and redoubted in Italy.  For, coming out of their country no otherwise but as mercenary soldiers, they have carried back no public fruit of their victories: the desire of gain making them to follow armies with huge pensions, and new demands of pays almost intolerable: and besides, to such as wage them, they carry themselves very forwardly and obstinately.  At home, the chief of them forbear not to receive gifts and pensions of Princes, to follow and favour their faction in their dyots.  By reason whereof, public things being referred to private profit, and favours and voices being made vendible and corrupted, discords by little and little have crept in among themselves, whereby it came to pass, that matters which had been approved in their dyots by the most part of the Cantons, being not embraced and followed of the residue, they fell at last and that not long since, to manifest wars among themselves, much to the diminution of the authority which they bare in the world.  Somewhat below these be certain towns and villages inhabited by a people called Valesians, as having their dwellings in valleys; they are inferior to the Swissers in number, in public authority, and in valour, for that in the judgment of all men they are not so hardy as the Swissers.  There is also, yet more lower than these, another sort of people called Grisons, which are governed by three Cantons, and thereupon are called Lords of the three Leagues.  The capital town of their country is called Coire: they have society and confederation with the Swissers, and with them they go to the war: they have almost the same policy, the same laws, the same manners, and for warlike matters are preferred afore the Valesians, but they hold no comparison with the Swissers, either in numbers or in valour. . . .

373-374. Heinrich Göldli’s defence before the Diet
unknown
13 March 1520
  In regard to the second article, it is true, I have in time past taken up livings and have requested them of the Pope.  I serve the Pope for no other cause, nor have I any other reward or wage from the Pope, neither I nor others of His Holiness’ servants, except such livings as happen to fall vacant in the Pope’s month, which His Holiness presents to us, every one in his own country. . . . I hope that although I have made contracts or agreements regarding livings which I have lawfully received from his Holiness the Pope for my services over against an evil day, I have had the power and right to do so, so that I may act as I please with mine own and may gain mine own benefit and advantage. . . .
  I have never in my life surrendered anything from which I have had profit without having given written evidence and laid myself under written obligation, so that, in case it should be disputed by anybody and I failed to protect him with my title and at my own expense in the holding of the living, I should be in duty bound to pay back all costs and damages, as well as all that I have received from him. . . .
  . . . In regard to the third article, that I have sold livings in the same way as horses are sold at Zurzach, I have never in all my life sold a living or bought it in this way, for that is simony, and whoever buys and sells livings ought to be deprived of them.  But I have, when I have delivered over a living, by permission of his Holiness, demanded and taken the costs to which I have been put, and also have caused a yearly pension to be allowed me out of the living, a thing which is permitted me by the Pope, and concerning which I have my bulls, letters and seals; for this is a common custom among the 
  clergy. . . .
  . . . Furthermore, the Pope has given me the reservation of the provostship of Zurzach, so that when the present provost, Peter Attenhofer, shall die, his provostship shall fall to me.  I have also for this the letter and seal, and have paid the annates, as the firstfruits are called, to the camera apostolica.

374. The admissions of Canon Hofmann
unknown
Dec. 1521
  Zwingli ought to be more careful about the wanton charges and sharp sallies . . . with which he assails the several estates, offices, orders, and communities, spiritual and lay.  He is alleged to have said ‘that among a hundred or a thousand spiritual persons, priests, monks, nuns, brethren, sisters and the like, scarcely a single one can be found that does not do and practise unchastity; that those who do not openly practise the same do worse, as he had come to know through the confessional at Einsiedeln; and that Beguines or sisters carry love-letters about with them and are procuresses.’  It would be worth a good deal if such things did not happen.

385. Mandate of the Burgomaster and Council for Scriptural preaching
unknown
Dec. 1520
  That they all and generally preach in freedom (as is also granted by the papal laws) the holy Gospels and Epistles of the Apostles conformably with the word of God, and the true divine Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and that they teach that which they receive and hold from the said Scriptures, and say nothing of other accidental innovations and rules.

385. Bullinger’s account of Zaingli’s preaching in 1521.
unknown
1521
  Zwingli preached at this time very earnestly against taking money, saying that it would break up and disturb the pious Confederation.  He spoke also against unions with princes and lords.  If they were made, each honest man should regard them.  What had been promised should also be kept.  Therefore, no one should enter into any unions; and if God helps a people out of unions, they should avoid entering into them again; for they cost much blood.  ‘And I wish,’ said he, Zwingli, ‘that they had made a hole in the union with the Pope, and had given his messenger something to carry home on his back.’  He said also that one would be aroused about a voracious wolf, but they do not offer protection from the wolves which destroy men.  They may well wear red hats and mantles; for if one should shake them, ducats and crowns would fall out; if one should wring them, there would run from them his son’s, brother’s, father’s, and good friends’ blood.

385-386. Zürich repudiates pensions 16-23 May 1521.
unknown
16 May 1521
  . . . The entire Commune of Horgen has, in respect of the French alliance, resolved to reply [sc. to the Council of Zürich] as follows:--Whereas you, my Lords, some years ago made a law and ordinance respecting foreign princes and lords and consented and swore thereto and bound yourselves by oath at Horgen to live by and observe the same, be it therefore the friendly petition and request of our whole Commune that you, my Lords, would still continue therein, so that we may be quit of the French alliance and of all princes and lords besides; and that, so far as is consistent with your clemency and indulgence, you would put the French party, foreign and German, out of your city and country, so that not a single honest man’s son should be inveigled by them, but stay at home and in his own country.  Then they would be neither French nor Imperial, but good Zürichers and Confederates. . . .

390-391. Some citizens break the fast on Ash Wednesday
unknown
5 March 1522
  Inquiry as to who had been eating flesh and eggs in Lent.
  I (a).  Elsi Flammer, maidservant of the printer in the Niederdorf, said she had by her master’s orders cooked some sausages on Ash Wednesday, and that the people’s priest [Leo Judä] of Einsiedeln, Bartholomew Pur, and Michael Hirt, had eaten of them.  Afterwards several vinedressers of her master’s had eaten of this flesh. . . .
  . . . (c).  Bartholomew Pur, the baker, said: On Ash Wednesday he and Master Uolrich [Zwingli], people’s priest at the Great Minster, Master Leo Jud, people’s priest at Einsiedeln, Master Laurence [Keller], parson of Egg, Henry Aberli, Michael Hirt the baker, Conrad Luchsinger, and Conrad Escher, were in the kitchen of the printer’s [Froschauer’s] house: and the printer produced two dried sausages.  They cut them up and each had a little bit.  All ate of them, except Master Uolrich Zwingli, people’s priest at the Great Minster. . . .

391. Street-fighting.
unknown
unknown
  Michael Ferrich, a journeyman shoemaker from Würzburg, came to blows with James Schmidt of Meilen about the month and eating flesh.  The one said, ‘People eat flesh in March.’  ‘No, that they don’t,’ replied the other.  ‘Well,’ continued the stranger, ‘it seems to me there are folks in this country who can get on better with whey and cheese than with Scripture.’  And when he went on to chaff his fellow about his ‘old cow-country’ and so forth, they fell to settle it with their fists, till the neighbours made peace.

391. Christopher Froschauer’s defence
unknown
April 1522
  Christopher Froschauer, printer to the Council.—(1)  In the first place, prudent, gracious, pious and dear Lords, as it has come to your knowledge that I have eaten flesh in my house, I plead guilty, and in the following wise: I have so much work on hand, and it is costing me so much in body, goods, and work, that I have to get on and work at it day and night, holy day and work-a-day, so that I may get it ready by Frankfurt Fair.  The work is the epistles of St. Paul. . . . (2) Next, on further reflection, I find that the Almighty and gracious God has visited us and illuminated us with the light of the truth, i.e. with God’s Word, which we must truly believe if we are to become really blessed; that God has left us nothing on earth wherein to trust save the holy Gospel, which is His godly Word; that this we must believe and hold by and keep to; and further, we must direct our lives and actions by the rule of the Gospel, else we are not Christians.  (3) And I find also, on reflection, that God has, in particular, so faithfully provided the town of Zürich with such a preacher that no better can be found in all Germany, and he is the praise and glory of Zürich. . . . (5) I have therefore such confidence in you, my Lords, as to say that, if the Spiritualty put us under penalties, and it is neither against God nor holy Scripture, you will protect and defend us in our godly rights.

398-399. The decision of the Great Council
unknown
9 April 1522
  Burgomaster Schmid and the Council.
  (1)  Whereas at the beginning of this Lent sundry persons ate flesh. . . and perhaps assumed that they were not thereby sinning against God’s commandments, though much and divers debate and dissension arose thereon, in such sort that our gracious Lord of Constance, as our Ordinary and Bishop, sent to Zürich his worshipful Commission, to wit, the Bishop Suffragan, the preacher of the Cathedral at Constance and his Chancellor, who came first to the Provost and Chapter of SS. Felix and Regula and afterwards to the Little and to the Great Council, and with fatherly fidelity and charity admonished us. . . . And whereas such admonition, with much more fine speaking on the part of the Commission of our gracious Lord of Constance took place before the Little and the Great Councils in the presence of the three people’s priests of the Great Minster, of our Lady’s Minster, and of St. Peter’s, and the three people’s priests were heard thereon through Master Uolrich Zwingli.—Now therefore it is resolved, and requested of the Commission of our gracious Lord of Constance to express our high and diligent thanks to him for his fatherly notice and faithful admonition, and with special earnestness to desire his Grace that without delay he would do his utmost to get the matter brought before his Holiness the Pope, by the cardinals, bishops, councils, or by true Christian men of learning, so that at length an elucidation and answer might be given how and in what way men should order themselves in such case, so that nothing be done against the laws of Christ.
  (2)  Further, it is decreed that on Sunday next [Apr. 13] in the three parishes the people be warned and admonished that henceforward during the fast no one eat flesh without special cause, but await the elucidation according to the tenor of an agreement made with the Commission of our gracious Lord.
  (3)  It is also hereby required that those who have eaten flesh to the distress of their consciences shall make their confession, and that their confessors, as in a spiritual matter, shall punish them with penance imposed.
  (4)  No one shall charge his neighbour with worthlessness or contentiousness, or with putting away the eating of flesh, but every one shall keep the peace; and should any man behave so unruly, he will be liable to punishment therefor.

399. The Bishop’s Letter to the Council
unknown
24 May 1522
  Our friendly greetings, &c.  Whereas we lately sent you our Commission with instructions to advise you, concerning the innovations and abuses on the part of some who ate flesh last Lent contrary to the accepted ordinances, customs, and usage of the Christian Church, for the reasons given to put them down, and further to refrain from disparaging or abandoning other accepted ordinances, laws, and good customs of the Christian Church, as ye have understood them this long time past, and have been informed of the answer and the resolution you gave to our Commission: and whereas the aforesaid laws, ordinances, usages, traditions, and good customs of Holy Church are acknowledged to have so good a Christian intent that they have been accepted of all Christian men and for many years past have been laudably observed and unanimously holden of all Christendom, and, moreover, cannot be omitted by any one for his own purposes without scandal and offence; Now, therefore, as against all this, we, on our part, do you no otherwise to wit than that it is our fatherly faithful advice and our friendly earnest request that ye will compose the scandal and offence among you by Christian and due obedience to the ordinances and good customs of Holy Church, and, so far as in you lies, cause them to be observed and done amongst you.  This we believe to be in accordance with the Gospel, with the teaching of Paul, and with the holy Christian 
  faith. . . .

407. Zwingli’s resignation and re-appointment
unknown
12 Nov. 1522
  Burgomaster Röist and Councillors.—Whereas the Provost and Chapter of the Great Minster on Wednesday after St. Martin’s Day appeared before the Council to say that Huldreich Zwingli had resigned his office of people’s priest, for which it lay with them again to provide; and that, with a view to the office being honestly filled by a learned man, they were desirous of taking counsel with my Lords: and whereas my Lords have understood from Master Huldreich, both on St. Martin’s Day in the church and otherwise, the reasons for which he proffered such resignation; it is left to the ordering of the Provost and Chapter, for the sake of peace and quiet, to fill the office of people’s priest with another honest man.  Nevertheless, Master Huldreich Zwingli shall furnish the pulpit with sermons after his offer of resignation as before.

407-408. The Council’s order to the nuns
Oetenbach
1 Dec. 1522
  Burgomaster Röist and the Council.—1.  With regard to the dispute between certain ladies at Oetenbach, as about other matters so, in particular, concerning their soul’s health, whether to pursue the same better outside the nunnery than within; since the more part are minded to remain in the nunners as heretofore, and desire not to suffer the others to leave but all to abide together as hitherto.—It is, in this behalf, decreed and resolved that until next Whitsuntide the said ladies of either part shall in God’s name friendly and lovingly live and remain together in Christian charity, pending some steps to be taken in the meanwhile, whether by spiritual or by temporal authority, whereby it may be arranged how and what to do or not to do.
  2.  It is further decreed that each lady may at her pleasure choose and have a confessor, of the secular or of the regular clergy, to hear her confession at the grill as the custom is.  Moreover both secular and regular clergy shall and may say Mass and preach in the church; and it is expressly required that neither secular priest nor friar shall preach anything but what they may support from the holy lips of God and the Gospel, and so an end be put to all other nonsense, as agreed: all, however, on condition that so soon as Confessions, Masses, and Sermons are over, then no priest, regular or secular, shall after that go to the nunnery, unless it be to provide any sick ladies therein with Confession or the Sacraments. . . .

442. The Council’s treatment of the Old Learning
unknown
19 Jan. 1524
  Whereas in the Disputation with the Canons H. Anshelm Graf, Konrad Hofmann, Rudolf Hofmann, M. Erhard Battmann, and H. Heinrich Nüscheler it turned out that ‘they had done nothing’, all five had to be brought up before the Burgomaster and Council for the execution of the mandates, sentences, and decisions issued.  ‘Otherwise let men believe as they will.  If they do [as ordered], my Lords will be the more gracious to them.  But if they do it not, and afterwards are found in the city and on their benefices, then they will be put out of their benefices and shown the way out of the city.’

442. The Council’s defence of its proceedings
unknown
21 March 1524
  At the end of their answer they say, ‘In all that is possible for us and to which we are bound, as becomes pious members of the Confederation, we shall be glad to comply with your requests, and to wait upon you according to our bounden duty.  But in what concerns the Word of God, our souls’ salvation and our consciences, we cannot give 
  way,. . . .’

442-443. The putting down of relics and organs
unknown
June 1524
  At the Great Minster in Zürich were shrines called the shrines of the blessed martyrs Felix and Regula.  And as the common people were for it, the bodies of the blessed martyrs were kept and buried therein.  But the honourable Council and the Citizens also ordered at this time, in June, that they should be put thence and out of the church: and, should there be any corpses therein, they should be honourably and quietly interred, or secretly dispersed in the bone house. . . . At this time also the magistrates at Zürich ordered that there should be no more playing of organs in the city and in the churches; no ringing for the dead, and for and against the weather; no more blessing of palms, salt, water, and candles; and no more bringing to any one of the last baptism or extreme unction; but that all such superstitions should cease and be clean put away, inasmuch as they are all at variance with the clear word of God.

443. The Dissolution of Religious Houses
unknown
5 Dec. 1524
  The offer of the Abbess of our Lady’s Minster, in respect of her surrender of her convent, to set her hand and seal thereto, was accepted with thanks, and put into immediate execution.  The Abbess was to remain in the Convent and ‘to be sufficiently provided, all her life long, as her needs and her station should require. . . .’
  As regard the Convents of men, a document was drawn up and read generally before the Friars.  The Friars of the Augustinian and of the Dominican House, if they would leave their Order and learn a trade, might have any possessions, which they brought in, given back to them: those who had no means were to be assisted out of the property of the Convent.

443. The last Mass in Zürich
unknown
12 April 1525
  On Wednesday in Holy Week the last Mass was celebrated in Zürich; and God’s table was set up, and the Sacrament and the holy oil with other ornaments were taken out of the sacristies.  All altars which were still in the churches were stripped bare; and all the week was no more singing nor reading, but all the books were taken out of the choir and destroyed.  Yet what pleased one man well did not please his neighbour.

443. Action oder Bruch des Nachtmals
unknown
13 April 1525
  Zwingli’s Preface.—Whereas for a long time past it has been made sure and clear enough from the Word of God that Christ’s Supper has been seriously misused, it is therefore necessary that everything that is not in accordance with the Word of God should be put away from it.  And whereas this memorial is a thanksgiving and a rejoicing before Almighty God for the goodness which He has shown us through His Son, and whosoever appears at this feast, meal, or thanksgiving witnesses thereby that he is of those who believe that they are redeemed by the death and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ; therefore on Maundy Thursday the young people who now believe and have come to the knowledge of God and of His Word, and desire to begin this thanksgiving and supper, must betake themselves to the floor of the nave between the choir and the entrance, males to the right and females to the left, and the rest must remain in the aisles, the porch, and other places.  As soon as the sermon is over, unleavened bread and wine shall first be placed upon a table on the floor of the nave, and then the ordinance and action of Christ, in accordance with His institution of this memorial, shall be recited openly and intelligibly, in German, as hereafter follows.  Then the bread shall be carried round by the appointed ministers on large wooden trenchers from one seat to the next, and each shall break off a bit or a mouthful with his hand and eat it.  Then they shall go round with the wine likewise; and no one shall move from his place.  When that is done, in open and clear words praise and thanksgiving shall be offered to God in an audible and distinct voice: and then the whole multitude of the congregation shall say ‘Amen’ at the end.  On Good Friday, people of middle life shall assemble in the place aforesaid on the floor of the nave, and the thanksgiving shall take place in like manner, men and women apart, as above.  On Easter Day, the old folk likewise.  The trenchers and beakers shall be of wood, that no pomp come back again.  And this order, so long as it please our churches, we shall observe four times in the year, at Easter, Whitsuntide, autumn, and Christmas.

450. The Council’s mandate for Churchgoing
unknown
10 Aug. 1531
  Whereas the mandate for Church-going put out last year [26 March], 1530, has been badly observed; and people, young and old, men and women, idly wander about hither and thither during sermon-time, on the bridges, down the alleys, by the gates and alongside the moats; therefore our Lords order all persons who have concern and oversight in this matter of church-going and particularly, since need requires it, such as ought always to go from time to time, and hereby earnestly command that every man shall strictly observe the mandate to go to Church on Sundays and Holy-days.  And that no man may be able to fraudulently say that he went to another church, it is provided that henceforth the preachers in all the three churches shall begin to preach at one and the same time, convenient to all.
  Our Lords further give notice hereby to the numbers of those who are free and well-off that on work-days they frequent the prayers and preaching more diligently and better.  They have ordered, and it will henceforth be the rule, that the morning sermon shall take place every day, as hitherto, and that at 8 a.m. for half-an-hour there shall be a discourse and prayer.

451-451. Hübmaier’s evidence, 1525, upon Zwingli’s admission.
unknown
1 May 1523
  In 1523, on Philip and James’ day, I conferred with you [Zwingli] in Graben street upon the Scriptures relating to Baptism.  Then and there you said I was right in saying that children should not be baptized before they were instructed in the faith; this had been the custom previously, therefore such [persons under instruction] were called catechumens.  You promised to bring this out in your Exposition of the Articles, as you did in the XVIIIth Article, on Confirmation.  Any one who reads it will find therein your opinion clearly expressed.  Sebastian Ruckensperger of St. Gall, then prior of Sion at Klingnau, was present.  So you have also confessed in your book upon the unruly spirits, that those who baptized infants could quote no clear word in Scripture ordering them to baptize them.  From this learn, friend Zwingli, how your conversation, writing, and preaching agree.

452-453. The opinions of Grebel and Hübmaier.
unknown
unknown
  (1)  From a letter of Grebel to Münzer, 5 Sept. 1524.  We believe . . . that all children who have not yet come to know the difference between good and evil . . . are saved by the sufferings of Christ, the new Adam. . . . Also that infant baptism is a silly blasphemous outrage, contrary to all Scripture. . . . Since . . . you have published your protestations against infant baptism, we hope you do not act against the eternal Word, wisdom, and command of God, according to which only believers should be baptized, and that you baptize no children.
  (ii)  From a letter of Hübmaier to Oecolampadius, 16 Jan. 1525.
  We have public taught that children should not be baptized.  Why do we baptize children?  Baptism, say they [Zwingli and Leo] is a mere sign.  Why do we strive so much over a sign?  The meaning of this sign and symbol, the pledge of faith until death in hope of the resurrection to the life to come, is more to be considered than the sign.  This meaning has nothing to do with babes; therefore infant baptism is without reality.  In Baptism a man pledges himself to God; in the Supper to his neighbour, to offer body and blood in his stead, as Christ for us.  I believe, yea, I know, that it will not go well with Christendom until Baptism and the Supper are brought back to their own original purity.  Here, brother, you have my opinion; if I err, call me back.  For I wish nothing so much that I will not revoke it, yea, cut it off, when I am taught better from the Word of God by you and yours.  Otherwise, I abide by my opinion; for to that I am constrained by the command of Christ, the Word, faith, truth, judgment, conscience.  Testify to the truth; you can in no way offend me.  I am a man, and can fall, since that is human, but from my heart I desire to rise again.  Write me whether the promise in Matt. xix. 14, ‘Suffer little children to come unto me,’ &c., specially belongs to infants.  What prompts me to that is the word of Christ, ‘for of such is the kingdom of heaven,’ not ‘of them’.  I have sent letters to Zwingli by the captain of our volunteers.  Instead of baptism, I cause the church to come together, bring the infant in, explain in German the Gospel, ‘They brought little children, &c.,’ then a name is given him, the whole church prays for the child on bended knees and commends him to Christ that He will be gracious and intercede for him.  But if the parents are still weak, and positively wish that the child be baptized, then I baptize it; and I am weak with the weak, for the time being, until they are better instructed.  As to the Word, however, I do not yield to them in the least point. . . .’

453-454. The Council orders infant baptism, and silence
unknown
Jan. 1525.
  Jan. 18.—Whereas an error has arisen respecting baptism, as if young children should not be baptized until they come to years of discretion and know what the faith is: and whereas some have accordingly neglected to have their children baptized, our Lords the Burgomaster, Council, and Great Council, have had a disputation held about this matter to learn what Holy Scripture has to say about it.  As they have learned from it that, notwithstanding this error, children should be baptized as soon as they are born, all those therefore who have hitherto allowed their children to remain unbaptized, must have them baptized within the next week: and whosoever will not do this, must with wife and child, goods and chattels, leave our city, jurisdiction, and dominions, or await what will be done with him.  Every one will accordingly know how to conduct himself. . . .
  Jan. 21.—(1)  To the proceding resolution (Egli, No. 621) about Baptism, it is now added that ‘the special disputations arranged to deal with such matters’ are to be put away: in particular, Conrad Grebel and Feliz Manz are to abstain from ‘disputings and propositions’ and ‘to fall in with my Lords’ opinions’, because hereafter no further disputation is to take place.  If, however, they wish for any exception in the matter of belief, they may apply to the Burgomaster or to the three Overseers.
  (2) Moreover, in order that there may be the more peace from such folk, it is further resolved that the following shall abjure my Lords’ dominions, viz. the priest (William Röubli) of Wytikon, the assistant-curate (Brötli) of Zollikon, Ludwig Hetzer, and Andres [Castelberger] uf der Stülzen; and leave the country within a week.

454-455. Anabaptism begins
unknown
7 Feb. 1525
  (i) From [I] the Confession of fourteen imprisoned anabaptists of Zollikon.--. . . . They admitted that they had been baptized, and had become ‘servants, bondsmen, and subjects of God’; they would do whatever the Spirit of God prompted them, and not suffer themselves to be forced therefrom by any temporal magistrate.  So far as they were not hindered by the Word of God, they would be my Lords’ subjects.  [II] . . . § 2.  Rudolph Thomunn, of Zollikon, deposed that he had eaten the Last Supper with the old assistant-curate [Brötli?] and the [parson] of Wytikon [William Röubli], and had invited them to his house. . . .  There many had assembled, so that the room was full; there was much speaking and long readings.  Then stood up Hans Bruggbach of Zumikon, weeping and crying out that he was a great sinners, and asking them to pray God for him.  Whereupon Blaurock asked him if he desired the grace of God.  ‘Yes,’ said he.  Manz then stood up and said, ‘Who will hinder me from baptizing him?’  Blaurock answered, ‘Nobody.’  So [Manz] took a bowl of water and baptized him in the name of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost.  Whereupn James Hottinger stood up and desired baptism; and Felix Manz baptized him also. . . . Seeing the loaf on the table, Blaurock said, ‘Whosoever believes that God has redeemed him by His death and rosy-coloured blood . . . comes and eats with me from this loaf and drinks with me of this wine.’  Then several ate and drank thereof.  
  (ii) From Kessler, Sabbata.—Wolfgang Uolimann met Conrad Grebel on the way to Schaffhausen, and by him was so highly instructed in anabaptism that he would not simply have water poured upon him from a dish but, entirely naked, was thrust down and covered over in the Rhine.
  (iii)  Fragment of the trial of Dr. Hübmaier of Waldshut.—He [Hübmaier] said, moreover, that William Röubli of Wytikon it was who introduced baptism; then how, when he was at Waldshut, he came to him, and informed him for what God was preparing him.  William had brought several citizens with him: and went with them to a hamlet over yonder, and baptized them.  Afterwards they came to him and said, Why did not he also take the thing in hand?  But he declined and put the matter off till Easter; and, as the custom was then to hallow the font, he omitted it.  Then came William and baptized him; and sixty persons were baptized at the same time with him.  Afterwards, during Easter, he himself baptized some three hundred people. . . .

455. The Council orders Anabaptists to be drowned
unknown
7 March 1526
  From their mandate ‘to be published on Sunday in the three parishes’ [Egli, p. 445].—Whereas our Lords the Burgomaster, Council, and Great Council, have for some time past earnestly endeavoured to turn the misguided and erring Anabaptists from their errors; and yet several . . . to the injury of the public authority and the magistrates as well as to the ruin of the common welfare and of right Christian living, have proved disobedient; and several of them, men, women, and girls, have been by our Lords sharply punished and put into prison:  Now therefore, by the earnest commandment, edict, and warning of our Lords aforesaid, it is ordered that no one in our town, country, or domains, whether man, woman, or girl, shall baptize another: and if any one hereafter shall baptize another, he will be seized by our Lords and, according to the decree now set forth, will be drowned without mercy.  Wherefore every one knows how to order himself, and to take care that he bring not his own death upon himself.

459. Eck’s Theses at the Disputation of Baden, 21 May to 8 June 1526.
unknown
21 May 1526
  1.  The true Body of Christ and his Blood are present in the Sacrament of the Altar.
  2.  They are also truly offered in the Mass for the quick and the dead.
  3.  Mary and the Saints are to be invoked as Intercessors.
  4.  Images of the Lord Jesus and of the Saints are not to be done away.
  5.  After this life there is a Purgatory.
  6.  The children of Christians are born in Original Sin.
  7.  The baptism of Christ, but not of John, removes Original Sin.

469. The Christian Civic Alliance
unknown
25 Dec. 1527
  We the Burgomasters, Little and Great Councils, Citizens and whole Communes of the cities of Zürich and Constance, do all and singular to wit by these presents. . . .
  In order that this Civic Alliance may be in every way for the best and, so far as it extends, be understood, we have thought it well to explain the same by the articles hereinafter written:
  And first, whereas faith and the salvation of souls rests in no man’s might or power but is a free and unmerited grace and gift of God, therefore we of either part, viz. each in his own dominions, are so to bear and behave ourselves in matter of faith and the salvation of souls as to keep true to God and in accord with Holy Scripture; contrary to which neither party is to be allowed to afflict or attack the other or to help any one else, whoever he be, that presumes to act contrary thereto, whether by advice or in any way.  But should it befall either party to be subdued, in matter of faith or evangelical doctrine, by any one, be he who he may; or should any one presume to do us, our goods and chattels, any hindrance, damage, or hurt, or to overrun or invade us, or to treat us unjustly in any way, let it be from what cause soever, then we are, either party and, moreover, each at his own cost, with our bodies and goods to help, protect and, with all our resources, to assist the other. . .

470. The First Peace of Cappel
unknown
25 June 1529
  First, as concerns the Word of God.  Inasmuch as no man ought to be forced in matter of faith, the Cantons and their domains shall not be put under compulsion therein: but as touching the subject districts and bailiwicks, which are under the lordship of either side—where they have abolished the Mass and burnt or done away with Images, they shall not be punished in person, honour, or goods: and where the Mass and other ceremonies are still retained, they shall not be subjected to force, nor shall any preachers be sent, appointed, or assigned to them, so long as the majority objects; but whatsoever the majority of their parishioners shall resolve to admit or to abolish, such as meats which God has not forbidden to eat, so shall it remain during the pleasure of the parishioners, and neither side shall make war upon nor chastise the other for its faith.
  Secondly, as concerning the alliance and Union with Ferdinand.  Inasmuch as this was concluded solely for faith’s sake, and it is now determined by the arbitrators that neither side shall for faith’s sake force, fight, or hate the other, therefore, before any one moves from the field, the said Union shall be forthwith given up and surrendered into the hands of the arbitrators, its seals broken, its parchment pierced and slit, so that every one may see the pieces; and the same shall be dead and gone and done with, and neither side shall hereafter make use of it or its like.  As concerning the other Civic Alliances and leagues lately concluded, a conference shall be held as to how they shall be carried on.  But the Christian Civic Alliance between the six cities of Zürich, Bern, Basel, St. Gall, Mühlhausen, Biel, and others, shall remain unbroken and inviolate.
  Thirdly, as concerns pensions, subsidies, gifts, and presents from Kings, Princes, and Lords, it is resolved never more to take the same: and the six cities with their subjects earnestly pray the Five Cantons and their communes to withdraw themselves from, and have nothing to do with, all Princes and Lords, as also from campaigns, pensions, subsidies, and gifts, and to have regard to our Fatherland. . . .

475-476. The Second Peace of Cappel
unknown
20 Nov. 1531
  First, we of Zürich shall and will let our trusty and well-beloved Confederates of the Five Cantons, as also their well-beloved fellow citizens and countrymen of Wallis with all their allies, spiritual and temporal, abide without any contradiction or dispute, in their true undoubted Christian faith, now and hereafter, throughout their cities, lands, territories, and lordships, all evil devices, evasions, deceit, and fraud being dismissed and put away.  And we, in our turn, of the Five Cantons will also let our Confederates of Zürich and their allies abide by their faith. . . .
  Secondly, we of both sides shall allow each party to stand fully possessed of all liberties, lordships, and jurisdictions which we have in the common lordships and bailiwicks, severally without let or hindrance.  It is also further resolved and concluded between both parties, that if, in these common lordships, any parish, commune, or lordship desire to receive the new faith and to abide thereby, it may be suffered to do so: but if any of those, who have received the new faith, desire once more to turn therefrom and receive again the old true Christian faith, then they shall, severally without let or hindrance, have free permission, full right, power, and authority so to do.  Similarly, if any one in the aforesaid lordships shall not yet have renounced the old faith, whether secretly or openly, he shall be allowed to abide by his old faith without opposition or hatred.  If, moreover, in one or more places it should be desired to set up again and maintain the seven sacraments, the celebration of the Holy Mass and other ordinances and ceremonies of the Christian Church, then they shall and may do so and maintain them, no less than the other side its preachers.  The church goods also and the property of the benefice shall be assigned at a fixed rate to the priest, and the balance handed over to the preachers.  Neither party shall revile or abuse the other because of its faith: and whosoever shall do otherwise shall be punished by the magistrate, according to the nature of the offence.
  . . . . . . . . . . . 
  Fourthly, we of Zürich shall and will withdraw ourselves from the newly established Civic Alliances which we have made with any one whether of our Confederation or among foreign lords and cities, and will regard them on our part as dead, gone, and done with, in accordance with our sworn league, inasmuch as the said sworn league is incompatible with such Civic Alliances, provided we desire to be Confederates.  Therefore we shall and will from this moment and forthwith surrender into the hands of the Five Cantons the documents of the said Civic Alliance, together with the afore-established Peace and the papers thereof, as dead, abolished, and no more worth.
  . . . . . . . . . . . 

690. The education of Mary, Queen of Scots, in France, April 1550.
France
April 1550.
  Item—Thereafter the said Master of Erskine shall report to the King[Henry II, of France] how rejoiced the Queen’s grace and my Lord Governor were of the news of our Sovereign Lady’s welfare, and to hear that the King’s Highness was so well contented with her Grace, and that she was so able to increase in virtue, and that the King’s Majesty takes such consolation, seeing the beginning of her upbringing to have been so good that he hopes someday to see his son the husband of one of the most virtuous princes that man can desire; beseeching God of his infinite goodness that his Highness may see not only the thing that his noble heart desires, but also that our Sovereign lady be after this so endued with the graces of God that she may by her birth [offspring] make his Highness to be called the grandfather of one of the most victorious princes in the world, and the King long to reign prosperously over both realms.

690-691. The marriage of Mary to the Dauphin
unkown
24 April 1558
  All things necessary for the marriage of the Queen of Scots with the Dauphin being prepared, and the whole nobility and estates of the realm of France being convened at Paris, upon the 20th day of April 1558, in the great hall of the palace of the Louvre, in presence of King Henry of France, of the Queen his wife, and a great number of cardinals, dukes, earls, bishops, and noblemen, the ‘fianzeillis’, otherwise called the handfasting [betrothal], was made with great triumph by the Cardinal of Lorraine, betwixt the excellent young Prince Francis, eldest son to the most valiant, courageous, and victorious prince, Henry, King of France, and Mary, Queen, inheritor of the realm of Scotland, one of the fairest, most civil, and virtuous princes of the whole world, with great solemnity, triumph, and banquetting; and upon the next Sunday, being the 24th of April, the marriage was solemnized and completed betwixt them by the Cardinal of Bourbon, Archbishop of Rouen, in Notre Dame Kirk of Paris; where the Bishop of Paris made a very learned and eloquent sermon, in presence and assistance of the King, Queen, and many prelates, noblemen, ladies, and gentlemen, of all estates and calling, with most excellent triumph, and the heralds crying with loud voices three sundry times, ‘Largess’; casting to the people great quantity of gold and silver of all kind of sorts of coin, where there was great tumult of people, every one troubling and pressing others for greediness to get some part of the money.  After which there were as great magnifique solemnities used in the Kirk, with as great dignity and reverence as was possible, which being done, they entered into the bishop’s palace, where there was a sumptuous and princely dinner prepared for the whole company; and after they had dined, there was used a princely dancing, called the ball royal, to the great comfort and pleasure of all being there present; and how soon the ball was ended, they passed to the great hall of the palace royal, where they supped with so great magnificence, pomp, and triumph, that none of the assistance there had ever seen the like; and there presently was given to the Dauphin the title of King Dauphin, so that he and the Queen were called thereafter King and Queen Dauphin.

691-692. Knox on the Second Prayer-Book of Edward VI.
unknown
unknown
  From his letter to Mrs. Anna Lock, 6 April 1559.—Our Maister calleth upon his owne, and that with vehemencie, that they depart from Babylon; yea, severelie he threateneth death and damnation to such as, either in forehead or in hand, beare the mark of the Beast.  And a portion of his marke are all these dregges of Papistrie which were left in your great Booke of England, any jote whereof will I never counsell any man to use.  One jote, I say, of these Diabolicall inventiouns, viz. Crossing in Baptisme; Kneeling at the Lord’s table; mummelling, or singing of the Letanie, a fulgure et tempestate: a subitanea et improvisa morte, &c.  The whole Order of your Booke appeareth rather to be devised for upholding of massing priests, then for any good instruction which the simple people can thereof receive.  Your Sacraments wer ministred, be the most part, without the soule, and be those who to Christ Jesus wer no true ministers; and God grant that so yet they be not.  Without the soule I say, they wer ministred, becaus they wer ministred without the Word trulie an openlie preached; and your Ministers before, for the most part, were none of Christ’s Ministers, but Masse-mumming priests.  They wer newlie created singers or sayers of Matins, Evensong, and of Communion; to church, or to purifie women, and to burie the dead with Commendo cinerem cineri, &c., whereof no point I find enjoyned to Christ’s ministers, but onlie to preach Christ Jesus crucified, and to minister the Sacraments in such simplicitie, as from him they had recaved them. . . . With Mr. Parson’s pattering of his constrained prayers, and with the massemunging of Mr. Vicar, and of his wicked companions [I will not meddle].  But consider, Sister, what I have affirmed, to wit, that wher Christ Jesus is not preached (marke well that I say, preached), that there hath the Sacrament neither life nor soule; and farther, that I say, none can be a lawful minister of Christ’s Sacrament, who first is not a minister of his blessed Word. . . .
  . . .England hath refused me; but because, before, it did refuse Christ Jesus, the lesse doe I regard the losse of that familiaritie.  And yet have I beene a secret and assured friend to thee, O England, in cases which thyself could not have remedied. . . .

692-693. King James V’s warning to the clergy
unknown
6 Jan. 1540
  From a letter of Sir William Eure to Cromwell, 26 Jan. 1540.—At his meeting with two gentlemen of the King of Scots’ Council at Coldstream . . . had divers communings with one of them, Mr. Thomas Bellenden . . . touching the stay of the Spiritualty in Scotland. . . . On being asked how the King and Council of Scotland were inclined towards the Bishop of Rome or a reformation of the Spiritualty, he said James himself and all his temporal Council were much given to the reformation of the clergy—so much so that they had an interlude played last Epiphany before the King and Queen at Linlithgow, all turning upon the naughtiness in religion, the presumption of bishops, the collusion of Spiritual courts called in Scotland the Consistory courts, and misusing of priests. . . . When it was over the king called upon the bishop of Glasgow, being Chancellor, and other bishops, exhorting them to reform their manner of living, and saying unless they did so he would send six of the proudest of them to his uncle of England, and as those were ordered so would he order all the rest.  The Chancellor replied ‘that one word of his Grace’s mouth should suffice them to be at commandment’, and the king answered angrily ‘that he would gladly bestow any words of his mouth that could amend them’. . . .

693-694. The Synods of Edinburgh, 1 Mar.-10 April 1559.
Edinburgh
1 March 1559
  From Articles proponit to the Quene Regent of Scotland be sum temporall Lordis and Barronis, and sent be hir Grace to the haill Prelatis and principallis of the clargie convenit in thair Provincial Counsall in Edinburgh.
  In the first, rememberand that our Sovirane Lord of gud memorie that last decest, in his lait Actis of Parliament for the common wele of this realme, thocht necessair to mak ane publict exhortatioun unto my Lordis the Prelatis and rest of the Spirituale Estate for reforming of thr lyvis and for avoyding of the opin sclander that is gevin to the haill Estates throucht the said Spirituale mens ungodly and dissolut lyves: And siclyk remembring in diverss of the lait Provinciale Counsales haldin within this realm, that poynt has bene treittet of, and sindrie statutis Synodale maid therupon, of the quhilkis nevertheless thar hes folowit nan or litill fruict as yitt, bot rathare the said Estate is deteriorate, nor emends be ony sic persuasion as hes bene hidertills usit: And sin the said Estate is mirror and lantern to the rest, it is maist expedient therefore that thai presentlie condescend to seik reformation of thir lyvis, and for execuiting deuly of thair offices, evry ane of them effeiring to thir awin vocation and cure committit unto thaim to do, and naymlie that oppin and manifest sins and notour offencis be forborn and abstenit fra in tyme to cum, etc.
  Item, that thair provid for prechings and declarings of Goddis Word sinceirly and treuly to be made in every paroch kirk of this realm upon all Sondays and utheris Holie Dayis. . . .
  Item, that alal prechers of the Word of God, or thair be admittit to prech . . . be first examinit deuly . . . if thair be of gud manners and of fitt knawlege. . . .
  Item, that thar be na curatis nor vicares . . . maid . . . bot sic as are sufficiantly qualifeit to minister the sacraments . . . and that thai can distinctly and plainly reid the Catechisme. . . .
  Item, that the Common Prayers with Litanies in our vulgar toung be said in evry peroch kirk upon Sondays and uther Haly Dayis efter the Devin service of the Mess, and that the Evening Prayers be said efternein in likwyse.

694. Archbishop Hamilton’s Catechism
unknown
1552
  From the Preface.—Efter that the divine providence of God had promovit us to the office of ane Archbischop and general primacie of this kirk of Scotland, we thocht oft tymes, that na thing culd be to God mair plesand, to the christin pepil mair expedient, and to our office mair convenient and consonant, than with all diligence to provide, that the christin pepil (of quhome we have spiritual cure under God) mycht be instruckit in the faith and law of God, with ane uniforme and concordant doctrine of Christis religioun, aggreabil in all pointis to the catholyk veritie of halie kirk. . . .
  To that effect we have exhibet to yow this present Catechisme: quhairin is contenit brevely and trewly, the sowmme of our christian doctrin, agreand in all pointis to the wordis of halye scripture, trew expositioun of the auld and catholyk doctouris, and in materis of contraversie, agreand to the decisiouns and determinatiouns of general counsallis, lauchfully gaderit in the halye spreit for the corroboratioun of our faith. . . .
  Heirfor it is to yow expedient to use this present Catechisme, first to your awin instruction, remembering quhat is writtin: Ignorantia mater cunctorum errorum maxime in sacerdotibus vitanda est, qui officium docendi in populo susceperunt. . . . Secundly, according to the decreit maid in our provincial counsale, our will is that ye reid the samyn Catechisme diligently, distinctly and plainly, ilk ane of yow to your awin parochianaris, for their common instruction and spiritual edificatioun in the word of God, necessarie of thame to be knawin. . . .
  And thairfor everilk sonday and principal dalydaie, quhen thair cummis na precheour to tham to schaw thame the word of God, to have this Catechisme usit and reid to thame in steid of preching, quhil God of his gudnes provide ane sufficient nowmer of catholyk and abil precheouris, quhilk sal be within few yeiris as we traist in God, to quhom be honour and glore for evir.  Amen.

696-697. The Band of 3 Dec. 1557, and the Resolutions
unknown
3 Decemeber 1557
  (a)  The Band.—We, perceaving how Sathan in his memberis, the Antichristis of our tyme, cruelly doeth rage, seaking to dounethring and to destroy the Evangell of Christ, and his Congregatioun, aught, accoding to our bonden deuitie, to stryve in our maisteris caus, evin unto the death, being certane of the victoie in him.  The quhilk our dwitie being weall considdered, We do promesse befoir the majestie of God, and his congregatioun, that we (be his grace) shall with all diligence continually apply our hole power, substance, and our verray lyves, to manteane, sett fordward, and establish the most blessed word of God and his Congregatioun; and shall laubour at our possibilitie to have faythfull Ministeris purely and trewlie to minister Christis Evangell and Sacramentes to his people.  We shall manteane thame, nuriss thame, and defend thame, the haill congregatioun of Christ, and everie membour thairof, at our haill poweris and waring of our lyves, against Sathan, and all wicked power that does intend tyranny or truble against the foirsaid congregatioun.  Onto the quhilk holy woord and congregatioun we do joyne us, and also dois forsaike and renunce the congregatioun of Sathan, with all the superstitious abominatioun and idolatrie thareof: And moreover, shall declare our selfis manifestlie ennemies thairto, be this oure faithfull promesse befoir God, testifeid to his Congregatioun, be our subscriptionis at thir presentis. . . .
  (b)  The Resolutions:--
  First, It is thought expedient, devised, and ordeaned, that in all parochines of this Realme the Commoun Prayeris be redd owklie on Sounday, and other festuall dayis, publictlie in the oaroche Kirkis, with the Lessonis of the New and Old Testament, conforme to the ordour of the Book of Common Prayeris; And yf the curattis of the parochynes be qualified, to cause thame to reid the samyn; and yf their be nott, or yf their refuise, that the maist qualifeid in the parish use and read the same.
  Secoundly, It is thought necessare, that doctrin, preacheing, and interpretatioun of Scriptures be had and used privatlie in qwyet houssis, without great conventionis of the people tharto, whill afterward that God move the Prince to grant publict preacheing be faithfull and trew ministeris.

697-698. The destruction at Perth
Perth
2 May 1559
  From a letter of Knox to Mrs. Anna Lock, 23 June 1559.—Yee hunger, I doubt not, deir Sister, to know the successe of Christ’s Evangell, the things that have come to passe since my arrivall, and my expectatioun in this interprise, dangerous indeid and verie strange to worldlie men, if ye sall understand the proceidings of our Brether, the true professors of Jesus Christ, since the time that they declared themselves enemies to Antichrist.  After diverse requeists made to the Queene Regent by some of the nobilitie, some barouns, and some communaltie; and after manie faire promises of her part, and yit nothing meaned by her (as the end did declare) but craft and deceate; the whole Brethrein together did consent, that the ministrie of the Word of God, and administratioun of the Sacraments, sould be erected; and that idolatrie sould be repressed, where the most part of the people sould admitt reformatioun.  And so was the kirk of Dundie reformed before my arrivall; publict prayers were in other places, which thing did so stirre the adversaries, that the preachers were summouned by the authoritie to answere, as criminall, before a civill judge.  The day of their appearance was the 10th of May 1559, which was the 8th day after my arrivall.  Being moved in conscience to give confessioune with my brethrein, after the rest of one day in Edinburgh, I prepared myself to repaire toward them; and so, upoun the third day after, I came to Dundie, where a great assemblie of brethrein was, for consultatioun what was most expedient in that doubtfull case.  The conclusioun was, that the whole multitude and number of brethrein sould accompanie their preachers, and give confessioun of their faith with them; and so from Dundie, they departed to Sanct Johnstoun [Perth], whilk late before had receaved the Order of Common Prayers.  but least that such a multitude might have engendered some suspicioun of resistance and rebellioun against the authoritie, one of the most grave and most wise barouns was directed to the Queene Regent with declaration of our mindes; which being understand by the Queene and her Counsell, it was required of us that the multitude sould stay, and not come to Stirline, which place was appointed to the preachers to compeir: and so sould no extremitie be used, but the summounds sould be continued till farther advisement; which being glaidlie granted of us, some of the brethrein returned to their dwelling-places.  But the Queene and her Counsell, nothing mindefull of her and their promise, incontinent did call the preachers, and for laike of comperance, did exile and putt them and their assistants to the horne; which decreate being spied, the brethrein soght the nixt remedie.  And first, after complaint and appellatioun frome such a deceitfull sentence, they putt to their hands to reformatioun in Sanct Johnstoun, where the places of idolatrie of Gray and Blacke Friers, and of Charter-house monkes, were made equall with the ground; all monuments of idolatrie, that could be apprehended, consumed with fire; and preests commanded, under paine of death, to desist frome their blasphemous masse. . . .

698-699. The assistance of England, July to Nov. 1559.
unknown
July 1559
  (a)  From Sir William Cecil to Sir James Croft, Governor of Berwick, 8 July 1559.—Has received, this 6th of July, his letter of the 1st inst., with a schedule therein contained of intelligence of the Scottish Queen’s coming to Dunbar. . . . Wishes his neighbours were advertised that the Earl of Arran is departed out of France, and that the French king means to send an army thither, viz. 200 men at arms and 30 3nsigns of footmen.  The Protestants there shall be essayed with all fair promises first, next with money, and last with arms.  Wisdom is to provide for the worst.  He may keep them in comfort that this realm neither may nor will see them ruined.  Desires him to endeavour to kindle the fire, for if it should be quenched the opportunity thereof would not arrive in their lives.  What the Protestants mean to do should be done with all speed, for it will be too late when the French power comes. . . .
  (b) Minute as to the Garrisons of Scotland, 4 Nov. 1559.
  1.  A general contribution and benevolence of all noblemen, gentlemen, burghs, and towns; and a taxation upon the kirk lands, and also the whole profits of such kirk lands as be against the Congregation, to be levied.
  2.  Of this a perfect book to be made, and men appointed in every county for the collection of the same, out of which certain money to be allotted for their charges.
  3.  Some to be appointed to have receipt of the treasure and make payments to the garrisons, or for munitions or necessaries, by warrant signed by the Lords, or three of them, whereof the Duke, the Earl of Arran, or the Prior of St. Andrews to be one.
  4.  Knox to be a counsel with the payments to see that they be employed to the common action.
  5.  The treasure to be kept secret, and that all such money as they shall spend in this common action may seem to grow and be levied only by the means above said.
  (c)  Parker, Archbishop Elect of Canterbury, to Cecil, 6 Nov. 1559.—God keep us from such visitation as Knockes have attempted in Scotland; the people to be orderers of things!