Not ready for processing

LETTER CCCXV. J. Tillison to Dr. Sancroft. The great desolation of the City.
unknown
September 14 1665.  
  REVEREND SIR,
  We are in good hopes that God in his mercy will put a stop to this sad calamity of Sickness; but the desolation of the City is very great.  That heart is either steel or stone that will not lament this sad Visitation, and will not bleed for those unutterable sorrows.
  It is a time, God knows, that one woe courts another; those that are sick are in extreme sorrow; the poor are in need; those that are in health are in fear of infection on the one side, and the wicked inventions of hellish rebellious spirits to put us in an uproar on the other side.
  What eye would not weep to see so many habitations uninhabited; the poor sick not visited; the hungry not fed; the Grave not satisfied!  Death stares us continually in the face in every infected person that passeth by us; in every coffin which is daily and hourly carried along the streets.  The bells never cease to put us in mind of our mortality.
  The custom was, in the beginning, to bury the dead in the night only; now, both night and day will hardly be time enough to do it.
  For the last week, mortality did too apparently evidence that, that the dead was piled in heaps above ground for some hours together, before either time could be gained or place to bury them in.
  The Quakers (as we are informed) have buried in their piece of ground a thousand for some weeks together last past.
  Many are dead in Ludgate, Newgate, and Christ Church Hospital, and many other places about the town which are not included in the bill of mortality.
  The disease itself (as is acknowledged by our practitioners in physic) was more favorable in the beginning of the contagion; now more fierce and violent; and they themselves do likewise confess to stand amazed to meet with so many various symptoms which they find amongst their patients.  One week the general distempers are botches and boils; the next week as clear-skinned as may be; but death spares neither.  One week, full of spots and tokens; and perhaps the succeeding, none at all.  Now taken with a vomiting and looseness, and within two or three days almost a general raging madness.  One while patients used to linger four or five days, at other times not forty-eight hours; and at this very time we find it more quick than ever it was.  Many are sick, and few escape.  Where it has had its fling, there it decreases; where it has not been long, there it increases.  It reigned most heretofore in alleys, &c. now it domineers in the open streets.  The poorer sort was most afflicted; now the richer bear a share.
  Captain Colchester is dead.  Fleetham and all his family are clearly swept away, except one maid.  Dr. Burnett, Dr. Glover, and one or two more of the College of Physicians, with Dr. O’Dowd, which was licensed by my Lord’s Grace of Canterbury, some surgeons, apothecaries, and Johnson the chemist, died all very suddenly.  Some say (but God forbid that I should report it for truth) that these, in a consultation together, if not all, yet the greatest part of them, attempted to open a dead corpse which was full of the tokens; and being in hand with the dissected body, some fell down dead immediately, and others did not outlive the next day at noon.
  All is well and in safety at your house, God be thanked.  Upon Tuesday last I made it my day’s work to kindle fires in every room of the house where I could do it, and aired all the bedclothes and bedding at the fires, and so let them all lie abroad until this morning; the feather bed in the back chamber was almost spoiled with the heavy weight of carpets and other things upon it.  I am afraid I have been too tedious, and therefore beg your pardon and take my leave, who am,
      Reverend Sir,
    your most faithful humble servant,
          JO. TILLISON.
  Brimstone, hops, pepper, and frankincense, &c. I use to fume the rooms with. For yourself.

LETTER CCCXCV. The Duke of Queensberry to Queen Anne; again upon the Act of Security.  A Plot to overturn the Government discovered.
Queensberry
August 11, 1703.
  May it please your Majesty,
  I have sent full accounts to Mr. Nairne of the proceedings of your Parliament, to lay before your Majesty, and am very sorry that I am never able to give your Majesty better news from it.
  It is very uneasy to me, and cannot be pleasant to your Majesty, that I always complain of your own servants, and especially my Lord Privy Seal, who leaves me, and concurs in almost all the humorous votes which tend to jealousies and division betwixt your two Kingdoms.  We have had two votes lately, in which I presume your Majesty would have expected that I should have had the concurrence of those whom you are pleased to trust in your service.  The first was, whether the Officers of State should be left out of that Parliament, or meeting of Estates, which (long be it hence) should name the successor; and though it was fully and well argued, that they were essential Members of the Parliament, yet I could not prevail with my Lord Privy Seal to vote for us:  and next, this day a clause was brought in, ordaining the Kingdom to buy arms, and that the whole fencible men should be trained and exercised in arms, and the reason for this was very fairly given, that because what was done would certainly offend England; and therefore that this Kingdom ought to be put into a posture of defense.  It was as fairly argued by us, that to give an order or law for arming was both unseasonable, and undutiful to do any such thing during your Majesty’s reign, which might embroil business with England, and encourage the common enemy abroad; yet in this I could not prevail with my Lord Privy Seal to give us his vote; and some others of your Majesty’s servants made a very cold appearance; and it is hard that, though the plurality of the Parliament are very well inclined to your Majesty’s service, yet by the fault of ourselves (for I dare presume to say no worse) we are almost outdone in every thing.  Yet I still hope, in what concerns your Majesty, your servants will not encourage any encroachments to be made upon your prerogative; and that they will concur to obtain the less at last; but for the invasions that are to be made upon the Successor, though I have struggled all I can in every point, yet these will be crowded into this Act of Security, which was brought in by my Lord Privy Seal against my will, which I think will now be finished in a day or two.  I shall send it to your Majesty, that you may consider whether you will allow it to be touched, though I am afraid that I shall not be able to hinder them to tack it to the Supply Act.
  I presumed lately to acquaint your Majesty that I had seen some letters from a Gentleman come from France, in which he spoke with some assurance of overturning the Government here.  Since that time, those who received the letters asked liberty from me to meet with that Gentleman, that they might try if they could learn any thing that might be useful to your Majesty’s service, which I yielded to, and one of them had a long conference with him, of which I have given your Majesty an account in a memorial herewith transmitted, and I beg of your Majesty, that it may be kept as secret, and made known to as few, as may be.  I am not yet allowed to name the persons, but if your Majesty commands me I must obey.
  God knows whether the story be true or false, but my author is a man of that quality and integrity that I dare assure your Majesty there is neither mistake nor trick on his part; and this I must say further, that there are several points related in the Memorial, that are otherwise confirmed, for I have seen a letter to Brigadier Maitland from one of his officers, wherein he tells him that he had intelligence of a Highland hunting, where six hundred of the best of the Laird of Grant’s men were to be in arms, and the Duke of Hamilton, and the Marquis of Athol were to be there; this letter I have sent to Mr. Nairne.  Major General Buchan acknowledges that one Mackenzie was put into the Bastile before he came away, besides the total desertion of all the cavaliers, except my Lords Balcarras, Wigton, and Dunmore, at that instant when these last orders came from France, and their joining in all things contrary to the prerogative of the Crown, with the vote this day of arming of the Country, do mightily instruct this declaration; and it agrees pretty well with the advertisement Mr. Stanhope had about money to be sent hither; but whatever is in the matter, I thought it my duty to represent it to your Majesty.
  I must beg leave to know from your Majesty, if that person shall apply to me, and be willing to own what he has said, how I shall use him.  It is strange enough that in his circumstances he should have said so much, and it can hardly be expected that he will forfeit what he may expect from France, without getting some terms from your Majesty.
  I apprehended, at first, that any opposition I met with here, was no further intended than to force themselves into places, and though I value the honor of being in your Majesty’s favor and service at the highest rate, yet when I considered that the consequences would only be as to me, and that it would be of less importance to your Majesty, who served you, I had far more ease in my mind.  But now that I have too great ground to apprehend this opposition is supported in order to attack or shake your Majesty’s Government, I shall be ready to expose my life and fortune in your service, and though I may not be successful in the trust with which your Majesty has honored me here, yet I dare say, that I shall be found faithful, and that the failure has not been on my part, but for the want of assistance from your Majesty’s other servants; and at the worst I hope nothing shall be carried that concerns your Majesty immediately; and a supply for some years may put your Majesty in condition to retrieve what was not to be hindered by,
            Madam,
        Your Majesty’s most dutiful, most humble,
          and most obedient subject and servant.
  Holyrood House,
  August the 11th, 1703.

LETTER CCCXCVI. The Duke of Queensberry to the Queen, upon the Rising of the Parliament.  Again upon the supposed Plot.
unknown
Sept. 25, 1703
background: FROM THE DRAFT INDORSED IN THE DUKE’S HAND-WRITING, “Copy of my Letter to the Qn. Sept, the 25th, 1703.”
  May it please your Majesty,
  I stay here some days, that I may receive any orders your Majesty may be pleased to give, after the rising of the Parliament is known, which I expect may be on Sunday or Monday next, and I shall be ready to set out next morning.  In the mean time I have endeavored to confirm such members as have served your Majesty in the Parliament, and engage them to return in the same sentiments, and I found many so well satisfied with the touching of the Acts, that they were frank to have given the Sessions at the 12th of October, and so well pleased to see that your Majesty keeps matters on the foot of the Revolution, that I am sensible we should have been stronger in the Parliament in October than perhaps we can be thereafter; and I was once resolved to have asked your Majesty’s allowance for the Parliament to sit at, or about, the time to which it is adjourned, but I was afraid that your Majesty’s other servants would not concur with me; and I find that many of them are resolved to go to Court, and give out that they have invitations to attend your Majesty, which made me forbear to insist for the Parliament’s sitting two or three weeks in October.
  The President of the Session could not be well absent from the Session here, and my Lord Register’s health did not allow him to travel.  So I have with much difficulty prevailed with my Lord Stair to come along with me, because he knew all my management and the proceedings of Parliament, in which he served your Majesty very heartily and honestly.
  I am glad to observe that there is a great calm at present here; one sort of people are pleased, and the other have got no irritation, and they content themselves that the Session was not obtained.
  I have seen that person of whom I formerly made mention to your Majesty; he confirms all that he had said to these persons who had dealt betwixt us, and adds many things more; he says he was let into all the secrets of the correspondence of Scotsmen with St. Germains, and tells plainly that very many do correspond there.  I am bound to tell your Majesty (though I ought not to believe him) that he says, he saw a letter last winter, written by my Lord Tarbat to my Lord Middleton, bearing that he was made Secretary of State, and that in a short time the Duke of Queensberry was to be shifted out, so as he was to be sole Secretary, and would have all the management of Scots business in his hands, that to secure their friends there would be a General Indemnity past, and the North country and Highlands would be made all of a piece; that the Duke of Queensberry had received five thousand pounds from the family of Hanover; that my Lord Middleton said, he knew the Duke of Hamilton was capable to be bribed, but did not believe the Duke of Queensberry would have taken money; he declares that Mr. Ogilvie of Boyn had frequent correspondence, which he begun when he went over to France, about his marble (yet I must do this gentleman the right to tell your Majesty that he did behave himself fairly in the Parliament, and there was none of the Gentlemen who call themselves Cavaliers that did keep their words so well to me as he did); he declares that there were three letters written by the late Queen at St. Germains, whereof one was directed to the Duke of Hamilton as Earl of Arran, which was delivered by one Captain James Murray, the other was committed to the person himself to deliver to the Duke of Gordon, which he actually did before he had entered into any correspondence with me, and the third was directed to the Lord Murray now Marquis of Athol, which was not delivered when he began this correspondence, and that he found the way to be master of that letter before it was delivered, which he gave to me, and I have transmitted to your Majesty, without breaking the seal, which is clear the effigies of the King, your Majesty’s father.  this person is willing to come to London, and to give what accounts he knows, providing he may do it secretly, and he offers to return to France, and discover all the correspondence and designs, but says that if he falls under observation, or that he be discovered, he runs the risk to be broke on the wheel; he says what money is transmitted yet from France, is only for the use of some particular persons, and that it comes by bills to London, and brought hither in specie.
  I confess it is hard to think how one should know, or be ready to reveal so much, yet the delivering of that principal letter, and the showing his own commission under the hand and seal of the Prince of Wales, as King James the Eighth and Third, which he says was the first paper sealed with his new Seal, these do give credit to what else could not have been so well trusted; and he says that he has a commission as Major General from the French King which lies there, that it might give no offence, till once the forces designed were raised.  I thought it necessary to entertain him with some money till your Majesty do signify your further pleasure about him.
  The Marquis of Athol’s great failing in the Parliament, with this letter, made me once very doubtful whether I should give him out his patent as Duke, which your Majesty had commanded to be done; but the regard I have punctually to obey all your Majesty’s commands determined me to give it out, and now many who were witnesses of his actings in Parliament, and who know that he stands upon a Jacobite foot, are mightily scandalized that he finds the first effects of your Majesty’s great favor after the Parliament, and this I am afraid may discourage them, who have acted a contrary part for your Majesty’s service in it.
  Having hopes shortly to attend your Majesty, I shall at present offer no more trouble from,
      Madam,
    Your Majesty’s most dutiful, most faithful,
      and most obedient subject and servant.
  Holyrood House,
  Sept. the 25th. 1703.

Henry VII. to Sir Gilbert Talbot.
Kenilworth Castle
July, 1493
background: Considering the weakness of Henry VII.’s title to the throne, and considering also the fact that among the small remnant of ‘Greater Barons’ who survived the Wars of the Roses, the wearers of the white rose were the more numerous after the battle of Bosworth, it is not surprising that Henry of Richmond, during the first years of his reign, was set the troublesome task of beating off pretenders to his throne.  The Lady Margaret of Burgundy referred to in this letter was the widow of Charles the Bold, and sister of our Edward IV.  Her country was the rendezvous of the disaffected Yorkist nobility.
  Trusty and well beloved,--We greet you well; and not forgetting the great malice that the Lady Margaret of Burgundy beareth continually against us, as she showed lately in sending hither of a feigned boy, surmising him to have been the son of the Duke of Clarence, and caused him to be accompanied with the Earl of Lincoln, the Lord Lovel, and with great multitude of Irishmen and of Almains, whose end, blessed be God, was as you know well.  And foreseeing now the perseverance of the same her malice, by the untrue contriving eftsoon of another feigned lad called Perkin Warbeck, born at Tournay, in Picardy, which at first into Ireland called himself the bastard son of King Richard; after that the son of the said Duke of Clarence; and now the second son of our father, King Edward the IVth, whom God assoil; wherethrough she intended, by promising unto the Flemings and other of the archduke’s obeissaunce, to whom she labored daily to take her way, and by her promise to certain aliens, captains of strange nations, to have duchies, counties, baronies, and other lands, within this our royaume, to induce them thereby to land here, to the destruction and disinheritance of the noblemen and other our subjects the inhabitants of the same, and finally to the subversion of this our royaume, in case she may attain to her malicious purpose, that God defend.  We therefore, and to the intent that we may be alway purveied and in readiness to resist her malice, write unto you at this time; and will and desire you that, preparing on horseback, defensibly arrayed, four score persons, whereof we desire you to make as many spears, with their custrells, and demi-lances, wellhorsed as you can furnish, and the remainder to be archers and bills, you be thoroughly appointed and ready to come upon a day’s warning for to do us service of war in this case.  And you shall have for every horseman well and defensibly arrayed, that is to say, for a spear and his custrel twelvepence; a demi-lance ninepence; and an archer or bill, on horseback, eightpence by the day, from the time of your coming out unto the time of your return to your home again.  And thus doing, 7you shall have such thanks of us for your loving and true acquittal in that behalf as shall be to your weal and honor for time to come.  We pray you herein you will make such diligence as that you be ready with your said number to come unto us upon any our sudden warning.
  Given under our signet at our Castle of Kenilworth, the twentieth day of July (1493).
  To our trusty and well-beloved Knight and
    Councilor, Sir Gilbert Talbot.

Cardinal Wolsey to Dr. Stephen Gardiner
Esher
1529
background: Cavendish in his ‘Life of Wolsey,’ prints this pitiful letter from the original in the Ashmolean Museum.  It is dated from Asher (Esher), whither the Cardinal was ordered to retire after judgment had been pronounced against him for having transgressed the Statute of Præmunire.  In his day of authority and glory Wolsey was the haughtiest and richest subject in England; only a very few days sufficed to deprive him not only of all his former magnificence, but almost of the commonest domestic comforts.
  My own good Master Secretary,--After my most hearty commendations I pray you at the reverence of God to help, that expedition be used in my persuits, the delay whereof so replenishes my heart with heaviness, that I can take no rest; not for any vayne fere, but only for the miserable condition, that I am presently in, and likelihood to continue in the same, only that you, in whom is my assured trust, do help & relieve me therein; For first, continuing here in this mowest & corrupt year, being entered into the passion of the dropsy.  Cum prostatione appetitus et continuo insomnio.  I cannot live.
  Wherefor of necessity I must be removed to some other drier ayer and place, where I may have commodity of physicians.  Secondly, having but Yorke, which is now decayed by viii. C. li. by the year, I cannot tell how to live, & keep the poor number of folks which I now have, my house there be in decay, and of everything mete for household on provided and furnished.
  I have no apparel for my houses there, nor money to bring me thether nor to live with till the propysse time of the year shall come to remove thether.  these things considered, Mr. Secretary, must nedys make me in agaony and heaviness, my age therewith and sickness considered, alas Mr. Secretary, you with other my lords showed me, that I should otherwise be furnished & seen unto, you know in your learning & conscience, whether I should forfeit my spiritualities of Wynchester or no.  Alas! the qualities of my offences considered, with the great punishment & loss of goods that I have sustained, ought to move pitiful hearts; and the most noble King, to whom if it would please you of your cheritable goodness to show the promises after your accustom wisdom & dexterity, it is not to be doubted, but his highness would have consideration and compassion, augmenting my living, and appointing such things as should be convenient for my furniture, which to do shall be to the King’s high honor, meryte, & discharge of conscience, & to you great praise for the bringing of the same to pass for your old bringer up and loving friend.  This kindness exhibits from the King’s highness shall prolong my life for some little while, though it shall not be long, by the mean whereof his grace shall take profit & by my death now.  What is it to his highness to give some convenient portion out of Wynchester, & Seynt Albons, his grace taking with my hearty good will the residue.  Remember, good Mr. Secretary, my poor degre, & what service I have done, and how now approaching to death I must begin the world again.  I beseech you therefore, moved with pity and compassion soak me in this my calamity, and to your power which I know is great, relieve me; and I with all mine shall not only ascribe this my relief unto you, but also pray to God for the increase of your honor, & as my poor shall increase, so I shall not fail to requite your kindness.
  Written hastily at Asher, with the rude and shacking hand of 
      Your daily bedysman
        And Assured friend,
          T. CARLIS EBOB.

Sir Thomas More to his Wife.
Court at Woodstock
September 3, 1529
background: Lord Campbell, in his ‘Lives of the Chancellors,’ lays particular stress on this beautiful letter written by Sir Thomas More to his wife on receipt of the news that the greater part of his house at Chelsea (with the outhouses and granaries) had been destroyed by fire.  The biographer is more attracted by the unusually simple style of the composition, and by the kindliness of disposition and unaffected piety of this good and gifted martyr, than by all his other elaborate writings and speeches.  A few weeks after this grievous domestic mishap, the most upright of Henry VIII.’s councilors was sworn in Lord Chancellor of England.
  Mistress Alice,--In my most hearty will, I recommend me to you.  And whereas I am informed by my son Heron of the loss of our barns, and our neighbors also, with all the corn that was therein, albeit (saving God’s pleasure) it is great pity of so much good corn lost, yet since it was like him to send us such a chance, we must not only be content, but also be glad of his visitation.  He sent us all that we have lost: and since he has by such a chance taken it away again, his pleasure be fulfilled.  Let us never grudge thereat, but take it in good worth, and heartily thank him, as well for adversity, as for prosperity.  And par adventure we have more cause to thank him for our loss, than for our winning.  For his wisdom better sees what is good for us than we do ourselves.  Therefore I pray you be of good cheer, and take all the household with you to church, and there thank God both for that he has given us, and for that he has left us, which if it please him, he can increase when he will.  And if it please him to leave us yet less, at his pleasure be it.  I pray you to make some good in search what my poor neighbors have lost, and bid them take no thought therefore, and if I should not leave myself a spoon, there shall no poor neighbor of mine bear no loss by any chance happened in my house.  I pray you be with my children and household merry in God.  And devise somewhat with your friends, what way was best to take, for provision to be made for corn for our household and for seed this year coming, if you think it good that we keep the ground still in our hands.
  And whether you think it good yet we so shall do or not, yet I think it were not best suddenly thus to leave it all up, and to put away our folk of our farm, till we have somewhat advised us thereon.  Howbeit if we have more now than you shall need, and which can get the other master’s, you may then discharge us of them.  But I would not that any men were suddenly sent away he wote nere wether.  At my coming hither, I perceived none other, but that I should tary still with the Kings grace.  But now I shall (I think), because of this chance, get leave this next week to come home and see you; and then shall we further devise together upon all things, what order shall be best to take:  and thus as heartily fare you well with all our children as you can wish.
  At Woodstock the third day of September, by the hand of
      Your loving husband
          THOMAS MORE, Knight.
    Not the least curious of the manuscripts in the Vatican Library at Rome are the original autographs of Henry VIII.’s love letters to Anne Boleyn.  It is supposed they were stolen from this lady at the end of the year 1528.  They remained in the Vatican until the French appropriated them, with other treasures of art and literature, after the invasion of Italy at the close of last century.  They were restored at the peace of 1815.  Halliwell, in his ‘Letters of the Kings of England,’ attaches great importance to this letter as fixing the period of the commencement of the King’s affection for Anne Boleyn.  Henry VIII. complains of ‘having been above a whole year struck with the dart of love.’

Henry VIII. to Anne Boleyn.
England
August, 1528
  On turning over in my mind the contents of your last letters, I have put myself into great agony, not knowing how to interpret them, whether to my disadvantage, as you show in some places, or to my advantage, as I understand them in some others, beseeching you earnestly to let me know expressly your whole mind as to the love between us two.  It is absolutely necessary for me to obtain this answer, having been for above a whole year stricken with the dart of love, and not yet sure whether I shall fail or find a place in your heart and affection, which last point has prevented me for some time past from calling you my mistress; because, if you only love me with an ordinary love, that name is not suitable for you, because it denotes a singular love, which is far from common.  But if you please to do the office of a true loyal mistress and friend, and to give up yourself body and heart to me, who will be, and have been, your most loyal servant (if your rigor does not forbid me) I promise you that not only the name shall be given you, but also that I will take you for my only mistress, casting off all others besides you out of my thoughts and affections, and serve you only.  I beseech you to give an entire answer to this my rude letter, that I may know on what and how far I may depend.  And if it does not please you to answer me in writing, appoint some place where I may have it by word of mouth, and I will go thither with all my heart.
  No more, for fear of tiring you.
  Written by the hand of him who would willingly remain yours,
      H. R.

Henry VIII. to Anne Boleyn.
England
1528
  The approach of the time for which I have so long waited rejoices me so much, that it seems almost to have come already.  However, the entire accomplishment cannot be till the two persons meet, which meeting is more desired by me than any thing in this world; for what joy can be greater upon earth than to have the company of her who is dearest to me, knowing likewise that she does the same on her part, the thought of which gives me the greatest pleasure.
  Judge what an effect the presence of that person must have on me, whose absence has grieved my heart more than either words or writing can express, and which nothing can cure, but that begging you, my mistress, to tell your father from me, that I desire him to hasten the time appointed by two days, that he may be at court before the old term, or, at farthest, on the day prefixed; for otherwise I shall think he will not do the lover’s turn, as he said he would, nor answer my expectation.
  No more at present for lack of time, hoping shortly that by word of mouth I shall tell you the rest of the sufferings endured by me from your absence.
  Written by the hand of the secretary, who wishes himself at this moment privately with you, and who is, and always will be,
      Your loyal and most assured servant,
          H. no other (A. B.) seeks R.

Anne Boleyn to Cardinal Wolsey.
England
1528
background: Anne Boleyn addressed this naive letter to Wolsey concerning the dispensation for her marriage.  It will be remembered that Anne was led to suppose that the delay of her marriage was caused by the Cardinal’s wish for another alliance, whereas he was really employing all his influence to induce Pope Clement VII. to issue the decretal bull.  The ‘recompense for his pains’ turned out to be that Anne, as Queen Consort, changed her servile admiration of him into bitter enmity.  Wolsey describes her as his ‘night-crow that never slept, but studied and continually imagined his utter destruction.’
  My Lord,--In my most humblest wise that my poor heart can think, I do thank your grace for your kind letter, and for your rich and goodly present, the which I shall never be able to deserve without your help; of the which I have hitherto had so great plenty, that all the days of my life I am most bound of all creatures, next the King’s grace, to love and serve your grace; of the which I beseech you never to doubt that ever I shall vary from this thought as long as any breath is in my body.  And as touching your grace’s trouble with the sweat, I thank the Lord that them that I desired and prayed for are scaped, and that is the King and you; not doubting but that God has preserved you both for great causes known only of his high wisdom.  And as for the coming of the Legate, I desire that much, and if it be God’s pleasure, I pray him to send this matter shortly to a good end, and then I trust, my lord, to recompense part of your great pains.  In the which I must require you in the meantime to accept my good will, in the stead of the power, the which must proceed partly from you, as our Lord knoweth; to whom I beseech to send you long life with continuance in honor.  Written with the hand of her that is most bound to be
        Your humble and obedient servant,
              ANNE BOLEYN.

Queen Elizabeth to the King of France.
England
November 12, 1593.
background: When Henry the Fourth, of France, abjured Protestantism, his ambassador, Morlant, was ordered to break the matter to Queen Elizabeth and to endeavor to calm her feelings by offering the poor plea of ‘urgent motives of state.’  It is said that after writing the following epistle the Queen sought to appease her wrath by reading Boethius’s ‘Consolations of Philosophy.’
  Ah, what grief! ah, what regret! ah, what pangs have seized my heart, at the news which Morlant has communicated!  My God! is it possible that any worldly consideration could render you regardless of the divine displeasure?  Can we reasonably expect any good result can follow such an iniquity?  How could you imagine that He, whose hand has supported and upheld your cause so long, would fail you at your need?  It is a perilous thing to do ill that good may come of it!  Nevertheless, I yet hope your better feelings my return, and, in the meantime, I promise to give you the first place in my prayers, that Esau’s hands may not defile the blessing of Jacob.  The friendship and fidelity you promise to me, I own I have dearly earned; but of that I should never have repented, if you had not abandoned your father.  I cannot now regard myself as your sister, for I always prefer that which is natural to that which is adopted, as God best knows, whom I beseech to guard and keep you in the right way, with better feelings.
  Your sister, if it be after the old fashion: with the new I will have nothing to do.
                  E. R.

Queen Elizabeth to Lady Norris upon the Death of her Son.
England
unknown
background: This note of condolence, disclosing a mood of tender sympathy very unusual with Queen Elizabeth, is nevertheless highly characteristic.  Her habitual regal reserve is maintained with quiet dignity.
  Mine own dear Crow,
  Although we have deferred long to represent unto you our grieved thoughts, because we liked full well to yield you the first Reflections of our Misfortunes, whom we have always sought to cherish and comfort; yet knowing now what necessity must bring it to your ears, and nature consequently must move many passionate affections in your Heart, we have resolved no longer to smother, either our care for your sorrow, or the sympathy of our grief for his Death; wherein if society in sorrowing work diminution, we do assure you by this true messenger of our Mind, that Nature can have stirred no more dolorous affections in you as a mother for a dear Son, than the gratefulness and memory of his Services past had wrought in us his Sovereign apprehension of the miss of so worthy a Servant.  But now that Nature’s common Work is done, and he that was born to die has paid his Tribute, let that Christian Discretion stay the flux of your immoderate grieving which has instructed you both by Example and Knowledge, that nothing of this kind has happened but by God’s Providence, and that these Lines from your loving and gracious Sovereign serve to assure you, that there shall ever appear the lively Characters of you and yours that are left, in our valuing rightly all their faithful and honest Endeavors.  More we will not write of this subject, but have dispatched this Gentleman to visit both your Lord, and condole with you in the true sense of your Love; and to pray you, that the World may see, that what Time cures in weak Minds, that Discretion and Moderation may help in you in this Accident, where there is so opportune occasion to demonstrate true Patience and true Moderation.

Queen Elizabeth to James VI. of Scotland.
England
1585
background: In warning James VI., of Scotland, against his double-dealing conduct, Queen Elizabeth, in her usual emphatic style, hints at her intention of ignoring the will of Henry VIII., and of respecting the rights of primogeniture by secretly nominating the descendant of her Aunt Margaret to the reversion of the English crown.  Although naturally fond of secrecy and dissimulation the Queen could not publicly avow her determination in this matter without courting troublesome opposition from the partisans of the other claimants.
  Right dear Brother,--Your gladsome acceptance of my offered amity, together with the desire you seem to have engraven in your mind to make merits correspondent, makes me in full opinion that some enemies to our good will shall loose much travel, with making frustrate their baiting stratagems, which I know to be many, and by sondry means to be explored.  I cannot halt with you so much as to deny that I have seen such evident shows of your contrarious dealings, that if I made not my reckening the better of the months, I might condemn you as unworthy of such as I mind to show myself toward you, and therefore I am well pleased to take any color to defend your honor, and hope that you will remember that who seeks two strings to one bow, he may shoot strong, but never straight; and if you suppose that princes causes be vailed so covertly that no intelligence may be wary them, deceive not yourself; we old foxes can find shifts to save ourselves by others malice, and come by knowledge of greatest secret, especially if it touch our freholde.  It becomes, therefore, all our rencq to deal sincerely, lest, if we use it not, when we do it, we be hardly believed.  I write not this, my dear brother, for doubt but for remembrances.
  My ambassador writes so much of your honorable treatment of him and of Alexander, that I believe they be converted Scots.  You oblige me for them; for which I render you a million of most entire thanks, as she that means to deserve many a good thought in your breast throw good desart.  And for that your request is so honorable, retaining so much reason, I was out of [my] senses if I should not suspend of any heresay till the answer of your own action, which the actor ought best to know, and so assure yourself I mean and vow to do; with this request, that you will afford me the reciproque.  And thus, with my many petitions to the Almighty for your long life and preservation, I end these scribbled lines.
      Your very assured loving sister and cousin,
              ELIZABETH R.

Queen Elizabeth to James VI. of Scotland
England
February, 1586-7
background: Queen Elizabeth here ridicules a proposal made to her on the part of the Scotch Commissioners that Mary, Queen of Scots, should be allowed to leave her captivity and be placed in the keeping of some neutral prince, subject to a guarantee from her relations that she should for ever abstain from all interference in the affairs of England.  The letter indicates with tolerable clearness Elizabeth’s intention to sacrifice the life of her dangerous rival.
  Be not carried away, my dear brother, with the lewd persuasions of such, as instead of informing you of my to nideful and helpless cause of defending the breath that God has given me, to be better spent than split by the bloody invention of traitors hands, may perhaps make you believe, that either the offense was not so great, or if that cannot serve them, for the over-manifest trial which in public and by the greatest and most in this land has been manifestly proved, yet they will make that her life may be saved and mine safe which would God were true; for when you make view of my long danger indured these four—well my five—months time to make a taste of, the greatest witz among my own, and than of French, and last of you, will grant with me, that if nide were not more than my malice she should not have her merit.
  And now for a good conclusion of my long-tarried-for answer.  Your commissioners tell me, that I may trust her in the hand of some indifferent prince, and have all her cousins and allies promise she will no more seek my ruin.  Dear brother and cousin, way in true and equal balance would they lack not much good ground when such stuff serves for their building.  Suppose you I am so mad to trust my life in anothers hand and send it out of my own?  If the young master of Gray, for curring favor with you, might fortune say it, yet old master Mylvin has yours enough to teach him more wisdom than tell a prince of any judgment such a contrarious frivolous maimed reason.  Let your councelors, for your honor, discharge their duty so much to you as to declare the absurdity of such an offer; and, for my part, I do assure myself to much of your wisdom, as, though like a most natural good son you charged them to seek all means they could devise with it or judgment to save her life, yet I can not, nor do not, allege any fault to you of these persuasions, for I take it that you will remember, that advise or desire ought ever agree with the surtye of the party sent to and honor of the sender, which when both you weigh, I doubt not but your wisdom will escuse my nide, and wait my necessity, and not accuse me either of malice or of hate.
  And now to conclude.  Make account, I pray you, of my firm friendship love and care, of which you may make sure account, as one that never minds to fail from my word, nor swarve from our league, but will increase, by all good means, any action that may make true show of my stable amity; from which, my dear brother, let no sinister whisperers, nor busy troblars of princes states, persuade to leave your surest, and stike to unstable staies.  Suppose them to be but the echoes to such whose stipendaries the be, and will do more for their gain than your good.  And so, God hold you ever in his blessed keeping, and make you see your true friends.  Excuse my not writing sooner, for pain in one of my knees was only the cause.
      Your most assured loving sister and cousin,
              ELIZABETH R.

Sir Francis Drake to Lord Walsingham
England
July 31, 1588
background: It was thought in Spain, at least by the priests and courtiers who surrounded Philip II., that one battle at sea and one battle on land would bring England to her senses, and compel Queen Elizabeth to acknowledge the supremacy of the Pope; and not a little of the literature of Spain in the years 1587 and 1588 pointed to the importance of capturing our Queen and killing Drake. The English Admiral was the chief offender.  By his successful expedition in 1587, he had retarded the invasion by a whole year, having tamed the Spanish, and, as he said, ‘singed the King’s beard.”  He is writing to that most successful diplomat, Walsingham, at the time we were hotly pursuing the dying Armada.
  Most Honorable,--I am commanded to send these prisoners ashore by my Lord Admiral, which had, here this, been long done, but that I thought there being here might have done something which is not thought meet now.
  Let me beseech your Honor that they may be presented unto her Majesty, either by your honor, or my honorable good Lord, my Lord Chancellor, or both of you.  The one, Don Pedro, is a man of great estimation with the King of Spain, and thought next in this army to the Duke of Sedonya.  If they should be given from me unto any other, it would be some gref to my friends.  If her Majesty will have them, God defend but I should think it happy.
  We have the army of Spain before us, and mind with the Grace of God, to wrestle a poull with him.
  There was never anything pleased me better than the seeing the enemy flying with a Southerly wind to the Northwards.  God grant you have a good eye to the Duke of Parma, for with the Grace of God, if we live, I doubt it not, but were it be long so to handle the matter with the Duke of Sedonya, as he shall wish himself at Saint Marie Port among his orange trees.  God give us grace to depend upon him, so shall we not doubt victory; for our cause is good.
  Humbly taking my leave, this last of July, 1588.
      Your Honor’s faithfully to be commanded ever,
            FRA: DRAKE.

John ap Rice to Thomas Cromwell, Visitor-General of Monasteries.
Bury
November 5, 1535.
background: Some 150 letters relative to the suppression of the monasteries were edited in 1843 by Mr. Thomas Wright for the Camden Society, from the originals in the British Museum.  They illustrate in very plain language the depravity that was rampant in the lesser monasteries, and the corruption that had wormed itself into many of the larger establishments; and even if it be allowed that Henry VIII.’s policy of confiscation was based on selfish motives, and that his plea of religious reform was subordinate to his secular aims, the suppression of four-fifths of the monasteries was justified by the voluminous report of the Visitor-General, Thomas Cromwell, in what is deservedly called the ‘Black Book.’  Although the Act of 1539 did not actually dissolve the greater houses, their occupants were  either persuaded or terrified into a voluntary surrender.  The cases of stubborn and recalcitrant abbots were dealt with by indictments for high treason.
  Please it your mastership, forasmuch as I suppose you shall have suit made unto you touching Burie or we return, I thought convenient to advertise you of our proceedings there, and also of the compertes, of the same.
  As for the abbot, we found nothing suspect as touching his living, but it was detected that he lay much forth in his granges, that he delighted much in playing at dice and cards, and therein spent much money, and in building for his pleasure.  He did not preach openly.  Also that he converted diverse firms into copy holdes, whereof poor men do complain.  Also he seems to be addicted to the maintaining of such superstitious ceremonies as has been used heretofore.
  As touching the convent, we could get at little or no reports among them, although we did use much diligence in our examination, and thereby, with some other arguments gathered of their examinations, I firmly believe and suppose that they had considered and compacted before our coming that they should disclose nothing.
  And yet it is confessed and proved, that there was here such frequency of women coming and resorting to this monastery as to no place more.  Among the relics we found much vanity and superstition, as the coles that Saint Laurence was toasted withall, the paring of S. Edmundes naylles, S. Thomas of Canterbry penknife and his boots, and diverse skulls for the headache; pieces of the holy cross able to make a holy cross of; other relics for rayne and ceertain other superstitions usages, for avoiding of weeds growing in corn, with such other.  Here depart of them that be under age upon an eight, and of them that be above age upon a five, would depart if they might, and they be of the best sort in the house and of best learning and judgment.  The whole number of the convent before we came was lx., saving one, besides iij that were at Oxford.  Of Elie I have written to your mastership by my fellow Richard a Lee.  And thus Almighty God have you in his tuicion.  From Burie, vth November.
          Your servant most bounden
              JOHNE AP RICE.
    
Richard Beerley to Sir Thomas Cromwell, Visitor-General of Monasteries.
unknown
1536
background: This letter, illustrative of the condition of some religious houses, was written by a monk of the abbey of Pershore.
  Most reverent lord in God, second person in this realm of England, endure with all grace and goodness, I submit my self unto your grace and goodness, desiring you myckely to be good and gracious lord unto me sinful and poor creature, my lowly and myck scrybullyng unto your noble grace at this time is gruggyng in my conscience that the religion which we do observe and keep is no rule of Sentt Benett, nor yet no commandment of God, nor of no Sentt, but lyyth and foulysse sermons, made some in old time and some in our time, by lyyth and ondyscrytt faders, which have done their duties and fulfilled their own sermons, an let the precepts an commandments of God go.  And so have I do this six year, which does now give my conscience sore, that I have been a dissembler so long time, the which religion say sent James, is in vain and bringing forth no good fruits; better out than in the religion, except it were the true religion of Christ.  Also we do nothing search for the doctrine of Christ, but all follow our own sesyaly and pleser.  And this religion, as I suppose, is all in vain glory, and nothing worthy to be except neither before God nor man.  Also, most gracious lord, there is a secret thing in my conscience which does move me to go out of the religion, an if it were never so perfect, which no man may know but my ghostly father, the which I suppose if a man must gauge in other young persons as in me self, for Christ say, nolite judicare et non judicabimini; therefore I will gauge my own conscience first, the which fault he shall know of me hereafter more largely, and many other fowll vycys don among religious men, not religious men, as I think they ought not to be called, but disassemblers with God.  Now, most gracious lord and most worthiest victor that ever came among us, help me out of this vain religion, and make me your servant, hand-made, and beydman, and save my soul, which should be lost if ye help it not, the which you may save with on word speaking, and make me which am now not to come unto grace and goodness.  Now I will instruct your grace somewhat of religious men, and how the Kings grace commandment is kept in putting forth of books the bishop of Rome userpt power.  Monks drink an bowll after collacyon tell ten or xii. of the clock, ane come to mattens as drunk as myss, and some at cards, some at dice, and at tables, some come to mattens begining at the mydes, and some when it is almost done, and would not come there so only for bodily punishment, nothing for Gods sake, with many other vycys the use, which I have no lesser now to express.  Also abbettes, monks, priest, do little or nothing to put out of books the bishop of Romes name, for I my self do know in diverse books where is name and his userpt power upon us is.  No more unto your noble grace at this time, but Jesus preserve you to pleasure.  Amen.
  Your commissary commanded me to write my mind unto your noble grace, by my oath I took of him in our chapter hows.
      Be me, your beydman, Ryc. Beerley, now
        monk in the monastery of Pershor.


Sir Francis Bacon to Sir Thomas Bodley.
unknown
1607
background: This little gem, composed in honor of the founder of the Bodleian Library, lies half-hidden in ponderous volume entitled ‘Cabala,’ consisting of some very important correspondence of the Elizabethan and early Stuart period. The letter is also published in some editions of Bacon’s works.  It was addressed to Sir Thomas Bodley on the occasion of Bacon’s presenting him with a copy of the ‘Advancement of Learning.’  So graceful a recognition of services to literature from the man of all others most capable of appreciating them, must have been very gratifying to the courtly diplomatist, at a time when public benefactions were sparingly acknowledged.
  Sir,--I think no man may more truly say with the Psalm, multum incola fuit anima mea.  For I do confess, since I was of any understanding, my mind has in effect, been absent from that I have done, and in absence errors are committed, which I do willingly acknowledge; and among the rest, this great one that led the rest; that knowing my self by inward calling to be fitter to hold a Book, than to play a Part, I have led my Life in civil Causes; for which I was not very fit by Nature, and more unfit by the pre-occupation of my Mind.  Therefore calling my self home, I have now for a time enjoyed myself; where likewise I desire to make the World partaker; my labors (if so I may term that which was the comfort of my other labors) I have dedicated to the King, desirous if there be any good in them, it may be as fat of a Sacrifice incensed to his Honor; and the second Copy have sent unto you, not only in good affection, but in a kind of Congruity, in regard of your Great and rare desert of learning.  For Books are the Shrines where the Saint is, or is believed to be.  And you having built an Ark to save Learning from Deluge, deserve in Propriety, any new Instrument or Engine, whereby Learning should be Improved or Advanced.

James Howel to his Father.
London
December 11, 1625.
background: This letter is interesting as being a contemporary account of the death of James I., and of the accession of Charles I.  The suspicion that the King was poisoned by the instrumentality of Buckingham, though very improbable, has been suggested by other writers besides Howel.
  Sir,--I received yours of the 3rd February by the hands of my cousin Thomas Guin of Trecastle.
  It was my fortune to be on Sunday was fortnight at Theobalds, where his late majesty King James departed this life, and went to his last rest upon the day of rest, presently after Sermon was done:  A little before the break of day, he sent for the Prince, who rose out of his bed, and came in his night-gown; the King seemed to have some earnest thing to say unto him, and so endeavored to rouse himself upon his Pillow, but his Spirits were so spent that he had not strength to make his words audible.  He died of a fever which began with an Ague, and some Scotch Doctors mutter at a plaster the Countess of Buckingham applied at the outside of his stomach:  ’Tis thought the last breach of the match with Spain, which for many years he had so vehemently desired, took too deep an impression in him, and that he was forced to rush into a War, now in his declining age, having lived in a continual uninterrupted peace his whole live, except some collateral aids he had sent his Son-in-law.  As soon as he expired, the Privy Council sat, and in less than a quarter of an hour, King Charles was proclaimed at Theobalds Court-gate, by Sir Edward Zouch Knight Marshal, Master Secretary Conway dictating unto him, that whereas it had pleased God to take to his mercy our most gracious Sovereign King James of famous memory, we proclaim Prince Charles his rightful and indubitable heir to be King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, &c.  The Knight Marshal mistook, saying, his rightful and dubitable heir, but he was rectified by the Secretary.  This being done, I took my horse instantly, and came to London first, except one, who was come a little before me, insomuch, that I found the gates shut.  His now Majesty took Coach, and the Duke of Buckingham with him, and came to Saint James; in the evening he was proclaimed at White Hall Gate, in Cheapside, and other places in a sad shower of rain; and the weather was suitable to the condition wherein he finds the Kingdom which is cloudy; for he is left engaged in a war with a potent Prince, the people by long desuetude unapt for arms, the Fleet Royal in quarter repair and himself without a queen, his sister without a country, the crown pitifully laden with debts, and the purse of the State lightly ballasted, though it never had better opportunity to be rich than it had these last twenty years:  But God Almighty, I hope will make him emerge, and pull this Island out of all the plunges, and preserve us from worser times.  The plague is begun in White-Chapel, and as they say, in the same house, at the same day of the month, with the same number that died twenty two years since, when queen Elizabeth departed.  There are great preparations for the funeral, and there is a design to buy all the cloth for mourning white, and then to put it to the dyers in gross, which is like to save the crown a good deal of money, the drapers murmur extremely at the Lord Cranfield for it.
  I am not settled yet in any stable Condition, but I lie windbound at the Cape of Good Hope, expecting some gentle gale to launch out into any employment.
  So with my love to all my brothers and sisters at the Bryn and near Brecknock, I humbly crave a continuance of your prayers and blessings to,
                Your dutiful son,
                    J. H.

Edward Hyde, Earl of Clarendon, to Sir Henry Bennet.
unknown
April 10, 1660
background: The feverish condition of the public pulse, sickened by the dominion of the soldiery and excited by the trickeries of incompetent agitators, is here gleefully described by Lord Clarendon on the eve of the restoration of monarchy.
  Sir,--The Parliament was, as you have heard, to be dissolved upon Thursday the 15th of last month, but there had been so many artifices used by the Republican party, to stay the business of the Militia, and afterwards to stop and corrupt it at the Press that the house resolved to sit again the next day, and then about seven o’clock at night they dissolved to the universal joy of all the kingdom, the republican party only excepted, who had no mind to cashier themselves of a power they were like again never to be possessed of; the people not being like to choose many of them to serve in the next parliament.
  Before they dissolved they declared the engagement, by which men were bound to submit to the government without King or House of Lords, to be void and null, and to be taken of the file of all records wherever it was entered; and this might be the ground of that report at Calais, that they had voted the Government to be by King, Lords and Commons; besides there was a pretty accident that might contribute thereunto, for the day before the Parliament dissolved, at full Exchange, there came a fellow with a ladder upon his shoulders and a pot of paint in his hand, and set the ladder in the place where the last King’s statue had stood, and then went up and wiped out that inscription which had been made after the death of the King, Exit Tyrannus &c., and as soon as he had done it threw up his cap and cried ‘God bless King Charles the Second,’ in which the whole Exchange joined with the greatest shout you can imagine, and immediately caused a huge bonfire to be made which the neighbors of Cornhill and Cheapside imitated with three or four more, and so that action passed nor do I find there was any order for it.  There was another signal passage likewise before the dissolution:  upon the reading the instructions to the Council of State during the interval of Parliament (which is not to sit till the 25th of this month) there is one which gives them authority to send agents or ambassadors to foreign Princes, whereupon Scott stood up and desired that there might be an exception, that they should not send to Charles Stuart, which gave occasion to very many members of the House to stand up and declare that they were in no degree guilty and did from their souls abhor the horrid and odious murder of the late king, and did detest the author of it.  Upon which Scott again stood up, and said that he indeed, and some others, had cut off the King’s head, but that the other gentlemen had brought him to the block, which put the rest into so much passion that they would call him to the bar, but after some heat declined it, saying he should answer it at another bar.  The writs issued out the next day for the choosing members to meet the 25th of this month; and very great care is taken in all places to choose such men as are most like to settle the government as it ought to be.  And now after I have told you all this, if I had not a very ill reputation with you for being over sanguine with reference to England, I will tell you that I hope we may save those honest gentlemen a labor, or at least do our own business with very great approbation.
              Yours &c.

Andrew Marvell to William Ramsden.
unknown
November 28, 1670
background: At the Restoration the poet Marvell, hitherto known as the colleague and friend of Milton, was returned to Parliament for the borough of Hull, and at once developed a policy so original and courageous that his name has become almost synonymous with the title of patriot.  His private letters to his friends during the early years of Charles II.’s reign are unique in the picture they give of the dark side of the times. Several valuable letters were written by Marvell to one William Skinner, who had not the curiosity to keep any of them, but gave them to the pastry-maid to put under pie-bottoms. (Thoresby Correspondence, vol, ii. p. 102.)
  Dear Will,--I need not tell you I am always thinking of you.  All that has happened, which is remarkable, since I wrote, is as follows.  The Lieutenancy of London, chiefly Sterlin the Mayor, and Sir J. Robinson, alarmed the King continually with the Conventicles there.  So the King sent them strict and large powers.  The Duke of York every Sunday would come over thence to look to the peace.  To say truth, they met in numerous open assemblies, without any dread of government.  But the train bands in the city, and soldiery in Southwark and suburbs, harassed and abused them continually; they wounded many, and killed some Quakers especially, while they took all patiently.  Hence arose two things of great remark.  The Lieutenancy, having got orders to their mind, pick out Hays and Jekill, the innocentest of the whole party, to show their power on.  They offer them illegal bonds of five thousand pounds a man, which if they would not enter into, they must go to prison.  So they were committed, and at last (but it is a very long story) got free.  Some friends engaged for them.  The other was the trial of Pen and Mead, quakers, at the Old Baily.  The jury not finding them guilty, as the Recorder and Mayor would have had them, they were kept without meat or drink some three days, till almost starved, but would not alter their verdict; so fined and imprisoned.  There is a book out which relates all the passages, which were very pertinent, of the prisoners, but prodigiously barbarous by the Mayor and Recorder.  The Recorder, among the rest, commended the Spanish Inquisition, saying it would never be well till we had something like it.  The King had occasion for sixty thousand pounds.  Sent to borrow it of the city.  Sterlin, Robinson, and all the rest of that faction, were at it many a week, and could not get above ten thousand.  The fanatics under persecution, served his Majesty.  The other part, both in court and city, would have prevented it.  But the King protested money would be acceptable.  So the King patched up, out of the Chamber, and other ways, twenty thousand pounds.  The fanatics, of all sorts, forty thousand.  The King, though against many of his council, would have the Parliament sit this twenty-fourth of October.  He, and the Keeper spoke of nothing but to have money.  Some one million three hundred thousand pounds, to pay off the debts at interest; and eight hundred thousands for a brave navy next Spring.
  Both speeches forbid to be printed, for the King said very little, and the Keeper, it was thought, too much in his politic simple discourse of foreign affairs.  The House was thin and obsequious.  They Voted at first they would supply him, according to his occasions, Nemine, as it was remarked, contradicente; but few affirmatives, rather a silence as of men ashamed and unwilling.
  Sir R. Howard, Seymour, Temple, Car, and Hollis, openly took leave of their former party, and fell to head the King’s business.  There is like to be a terrible Act of Conventicles.  The Prince of Orange here is much made of.  The King owes him a great deal of money.  The Paper is full.
      I am your’s, &c.

John Wesley to a Friend.
London
December 20, 1751
background: The rise and progress of Methodism is as marked a feature of the reign of George II., as the spread of Puritanism is of the reign of Queen Elizabeth. The Puritans were called into being by the injudicious activity of the Queen and her prelates against a body of men whose religious zeal rejected the superstitious ceremonies which were retained in order to win over the English Roman Catholics to the reformed faith; the Methodists supplied a want; their purpose was to infuse a little enthusiasm and discipline among the slack and lifeless regular clergy.  Bishop Burnet, the Whig, and after him, Bishop Atterbury, the Tory, both coincide in their estimate of the sorry state of public worship during the first quarter of the eighteenth century.  If field-preaching was common in many popular districts, it was because there were no churches in them.  No wonder then, that, as the Puritans grew from being an insignificant sect into a powerful political faction, the followers of John Wesley, in England alone, should have numbered 71,000 the year of his death.
  My dear Friend,--I think the right method of preaching is this.  At our first beginning to preach at any place, after a general declaration of the love of God to sinners, and His willingness that they should be saved, to preach the law, in the strongest, the closest, the most searching manner possible.
  After more and more persons are convinced of sin, we may mix more and more of the gospel, in order to beget faith, to raise into spiritual life those whom the law has slain.  I would not advise to preach the law without the gospel, any more than the gospel without the law.  Undoubtedly, both should be preached in their turns; yea, both at once, or both in one.  All the conditional promises are instances of this.  They are law and gospel mixed together.
  In this manner, not only my brother and I, but Mr. Maxfield, Nelson, James Jones, Westall, and Reeves, all preached at the beginning.  By this preaching, it pleased God to work those mighty effects in London, Bristol, Kingswood, Yorkshire, and Newcastle.  By means of this, twenty-nine persons received remission of sins, in one day, at Bristol only; most of them, while I was opening and enforcing our Lord’s sermon on the mount.  In this manner John Downes, John Bennet, John Haughton, and all the other Methodists, preached, till James Wheatley came among them.  The change he has introduced has done great harm to David Tratham, Thomas Webb, Robert Swindells, and John Maddern; all of whom are but shadows of what they were.  It has likewise done great harm to hearers as well as preachers, diffusing among them a prejudice against the scriptural Methodist manner of preaching Christ, so that they can no longer hear the plain old truth, with profit or pleasure, nay hardly with patience.  The gospel preachers, so called, corrupt their hearers, and they vitiate their taste.  They feed them with sweetmeats, till the genuine wine of the Kingdom seems quite insipid to them.  They give them cordial upon cordial, which make them all life and spirit for the present; but, meantime, their appetite is destroyed, so that they can neither retain nor digest the pure milk of the word.
  According to the constant observations I have made, in all parts both of England and Ireland, preachers of this kind spread death, not life, among their hearers.  This was the case when I went last into the north.  For some time before my coming, John Downes had scarce been able to preach at all; the three others, in the round, were such as style themselves ‘gospel preachers.’  When I came to review the societies, with great expectation of finding a vast increase, I found most of them lessened by one third.  One was entirely broken up.  That of Newcastle was less by a hundred members than when I visited it before; and, of those that remained, the far greater number, in every place, were cold, weary, heartless, and dead.  Such were the blessed effects of this gospel-preaching! of this new method of preaching Christ.
  On the other hand, when, in my return, I took an account of the societies in Yorkshire, chiefly under the care of John Nelson, one of the old way, I found them all alive, strong, and vigorous of soul, believing, loving, and praising God their Savior; and increased in number from eighteen or nineteen hundred to upwards of three thousand.  These had been continually fed with wholesome food.  From the beginning they had been taught both the law and the gospel.  God loves you; therefore love and obey Him.  Christ died for you; therefore die to sin.  Christ is risen; therefore rise in the image of God.  Christ lives evermore; therefore live to God, till you live with Him in glory.
  So we preached; and so you believed.  This is the scriptural way, the Methodist way, the true way.  God grant we may never turn there from, to the right hand or to the left.
  I am, my dear friend, your ever affectionate brother,
                JOHN WESLEY.

John Wesley to John King (one of his Preachers in America).
Near Leeds
July 28, 1775
background: Would that a few ‘gospel-preaches’ would take this bit of advice to heart.
  My dear Brother,--Always take advice or reproof as a favor:  it is the surest mark of love.
  I advised you once, and you took it as an affront; nevertheless I will do it once more.
  Scream no more, at the peril of your soul.  God now warns you by me, whom He has set over you.
  Speak as earnestly as you can, but do not scream.  Speak with all your heart, but with a moderate voice.  It was said of our Lord, ‘He shall not cry’; the word properly means, He shall not scream.  Herein, be a follower of me, as I am of Christ.  I often speak loud, often vehemently, but I never scream, I never strain myself.  I dare not.  I know it would be a sin against God and my own soul.  Perhaps one reason why that good man, Thomas Walsh, yea, and John Manners too, were in such grievous darkness before they died, was, because they shortened their own lives.
  O John, pray for an advisable and teachable temper!  By nature you are very far from it:  you are stubborn and headstrong.  Your last letter was written in a very wrong spirit.  If you cannot take advice from others, surely you might take it from your affectionate brother,
                  JOHN WESLEY.

List of Kings Ships
England
unknown
  “Here after ensues the Names of all the Kings Ships, as well that ride within the Port and Haven of Portsmith as thoo that ride within the River of Themmys, the xxxijth day of October in the xvijth year of our most drade Sovereign Lord King Henry the viijth.
  The GABRIEL ROYAL, of the tonnage of DCC. tons; and of the age of xvj years.
  The MARY ROSE, of the tonnage of VC. tons; and of the age of xiiij years.
  The PETER POMGARNET, of the tonnage of CCC.xl. tons; and of age xiiij years.
  The JOHN BAPTIST, of the tonnage of iiij.C. tons; and of age xiij years.
  The GREAT BARKE, of tonnage CC tons; and of age xij years.
  The LESSER BARKE, of the tonnage of Clx. tons; and of age xij. years.
  The MARY JAMES, of tonnage CClx tons; and of age xvj years.
  The MARY GEORGE, of tonnage CCxl. tons; and of age xv years.
  The MARY AND JOHN of the tonnage of ij.C. tons; and of age iiij. years.
  The PRIMEROSE, of the tonnage of Clx tons; and of age ij years.
  The MINION, of the tonnage of Clxxx tons; and all new.
  The MAUDELEN of DEPFORDE, of the tonnage of Cxx tons; and of the age of iij years.
  The KATERNE BARKE, of the tonnage of C tons; and of age iij. years.
  The MARY IMPEREALL, of tonnage of lxxx tons; and of the age of xiiij years.
  The TRINITE HENRYE, of the age of vj years; and of tonnage iiijxx tons.
  The BARKE OF MURLESSE, of tonnage of lx. tons; and new made.
  The SWEPSTAKE, of the tonnage of lxv tons; and iij years old.
  The SWALOWE, of the tonnage of lx tons; and new made.
  The GRYFFYN, of tonnage of lxxx tons; and of age xiij years.
  The GRETT SABRA, of the tonnage of fifty tons; and iij years old.
  The LESSERE SABRA, of the tonnage of xl tons; and of age iij years.
  The JOHN OF GRENEWYCHE, of the tonnage of 1 ton; and of xij years old.
  The PRISSE taken by Thomas Sperte, of the tonnage of three score ton; and of age xv years.
  The HULKE of the tonnage of Clx tons; and of age iij years.
  The MARY GYLFORDE, of the tonnage of Clx tons; and of age oon year.”

John Clerk, bishop of Bath, to Cardinal Wolsey, upon the state of Italy as affected by the Battle of Pavia.
unknown
unknown
background: The reader need hardly be informed that the Pope at this time was Clement the Seventh; who, previous to his taking the Papal Chair, had been known as the Cardinal de Medici.  His Pontificate was throughout conducted by a feeble and vacillating policy.  It was marked by two events not easily forgotten; the sacking of Rome, and the abolition of the papal authority in England.
  The Venetians and Florentines seeing them selves now in the discretion of the Imperials, whom they have not best entreated, be in a great fear, and therefore they not only arm them selves, but also have been vehemently in hand with the Pope that he should do in like manner, and have m . . . a description of great and high matters with his Holiness, as his Holiness showed unto me . . . .  to take no man’s right from him, but to maintain and defend their own; and that if the Imperials would demand any thing of them it might boldly be answered them, that they should nothing have.  The effect is that the Pope, the Venetians, the Florentines, the Duke of Ferrare, the Signoryes of Senys, Luke, and Mantua,l with other mean powers of Italy, should make a League for the defense and liberties of Italy; wherein they reckon that the Duke of Mylan would at length, when time should be, gladly enter, who as they reckon is now, and so is like for years to continue, in no less captive than the French King.  It is reckoned that amongst them, they should make well ij thousand spers, and xv thousand Swisses, and as many moo footmen of Italians as should be thought necessary; wherein there cane as they say lack no number, for to this purpose viz. for the liberation of Italy, where as in any other occasion they may make on, in this occasion they shall make iij.  In this description it is devised, first, as I said, to have the Duke of Mylan, who has in his hands the castle of Mylan and the castle of Cremona; which be the things of most importance in that Duchy.  The Pope should be contented to surrender unto him the Cities of Parma and Placentia, and have as much pention or cense for the same as he now has.  The Duke of Ferrare shall have his investiture in Modina and Regio, and pay therefore in ready money . . . . . ducattes; and it is meant that the Pope should have the realm of Naplis, which doubtless will easily no .. be obtained.  Their things be heir devised by the French faction and the Venetians, and they have been in hand with the Pope very vehemently in this matter, showing him that this is the very way which he should take, both for his honor, surety, and the liberty of Italy, which else shall be totally in subjection of Spaniards, being barbarous and unreasonable, and as odybyll people unto this nation as any can be.
  At such time as the Popis Holiness declared unto me this Devise, I showed His Holiness that I did not doubt but that of his great and high wisdom, he did consider right well that His Holiness was not in any such case that he should need to take one such way for his surety, for seeing that His Holiness had done nothing but that might be well justified, His Holiness should but, quantum ad se attinet, optime sperare de Cesare:  specially, that I knew the Kings Highness would not suffer that his Holiness should be in any manner of wise oncoragyd, as touching the Venetians.  I said his Holiness knew well enough they had offended; and their offence was but a money matter, wherein his Holiness might be a mean for them; and, percase they would not be ordered, I said good reason would his Holiness should forsake them.  And as touching this Description and Devise a fore said, all be it seemed now to have a fair face, and a semblance of good success, as the matters now stood; the Imperials being so far behind hand with their army, and having no little at this present time for the maintenance thereof; yet (I said) I doubted not but that His Holiness did right well consider the many fold inconveniences that might ensue thereby:  for albeit by this ways peraventur the army in Lombardy should be at a stay, and in some agony and perplexity for a season, yet there should be no doubt but that the Emperor and other Princes would never give up the matter so, but would shortly not only restore this army, but so renew and enforce the same, with the presence of their own parsons if need should be, that iij. such powers as Italy is should not be able to resist them: and percase they should resist, yet where as His Holiness has, to his great lawde, hitherto sought peace, rest, and quietness between Christian princes, especially here in Italy, this should be the ways to make for a long season, more cruel and universal war than was ever seen:  so that the wars past should not be compared to the wars to come, for those wars to come should be universal of all Italy against all the . . .  besides forth, and finally what should chance it in Gods hand, who being indifferent, (I said) th . .  was no doubt what likelihood, the powers of Italy, with the help of his Holiness, should be able to keep the Emperor out of Italy; yet that should be most for His Holiness is purpose, for His Holiness being excluded from the help and poge of other Princes, should not, amongst themselves same powers of Italy, be in the best case; and thereupon put his Holiness in remembrance how the Venetians have in times past encroached upon the lands of the Church, withholding from the same by force the Cities of Imola and Ravenna and other in Romania, the duchies of Ferrare, Modina, and Regio, the Bentivollis, Bononia, and here by the balions in Peruse, and in diverse other Cities and Sovereigns belonging unto the Church; no the Church was never able to subdue them, but was ever in continual business, inqwietnes, and war, unto such time as other Princes laid to their hands, by Pope Alexander is days, Julii is, and since: and showed His Holiness that the Pope of Rome was never like a Pope till he had the concurrence of other Princes, whereof when so mevyr His Holiness should be totally privy, I said, there was no doubt but that shortly after there should be found many right mean powers in Italy that would plume his feathers, and not set a groat by him; especially the Venetians; of whom His Holiness ought of all men to be ware, for their power should greatly increase by this ways; and by that is passed in other Popis days, men many easily see what they will attempt again when they shall see there time.
  His Holiness said that he saw the inconvenience that might follow by this there Devise many manner of ways; and thanked God who had put him in mind not to follow the same.  And so still His Holiness perseveres  in mind to enter what Leagueso never shall be thought best to the Kings Highness and the Emperor.
  Notwithstanding my thought, His Holiness did declare unto me the Description and Devise aforesaid, to the intent I should write unto your Grace what was proponyd, and whereunto His Holiness might have consented to the impeachment of your affairs; to the intent you should come home the more cause he so did not.  I thought also to advertise your Grace hereof, to the intent that percase the Emperor not now in this great fortune and prosperity know from whens, after God, the said prosperity and fortune common, and deal with the Kings Highness in fulfilling his promises accordingly, your Grace should know what is minded and intended here in Italy and whereunto the Popis Holiness might easily be brought.  Your Grace upon the Emperors unkind demeanor minding the same, assuring your Grace that in my opinion there is nothing that staythe the Popis Holiness in the not entering of this League of . . .  but only the hope and trust which he has in the Kings Highnes to be mean that this Victory in every behalf, concerning the matters of Italy, shall be moderately used.
  As for the matters of France, it should seem that his Holiness reckoned not greatly how you determine them, it is trowghe that by way of devise, His Holiness said unto me lately, out of purpose, these words exempli gra . . they . . . pro bono pacis make the French Kings son King of France, and deputt him a portion as small as they would:  taking the rest as they could agree:  so that by His Holiness meaning, he would have a King in France still, but so plumed that his cooportionars  and other his neighbors might live in rest by him without charge; and by this devise King Frances should end his miserable life in captive; the which thing His Holiness spoke but by the way of devise, showing him self of nothing more desirous than that these cruel wars might shortly, by one means or other, take some good end.
  I do comfort His Holiness still, all that I can, that the Emperor will be now more at his devotion than ever he was: and that the Kings Highness and your Grace will be mean that it so shall be.  I am also mean between the Imperials and His Holiness that they shall make demonstration unto His Holiness accordingly, showing them the jeopardys and inconvenience that may ensue at this present time by their contrary demeanor.  And I do not doubt but your Grace will make demonstration in this case unto the Popis Holiness, according to his good mind ever born towards you, and to the father and trust he has ever had in you, the which demonstration should in such times as they be, cannot be forgotten hereafter.
  The Archbishop of Capua is returned here again since the conflict, and showed me that your Grace reputes him a French man, and that that would you not do if you knew how the French men have evil entreated him:  and . . .  him in France, not in prison, but a hunting . . . gain his will ij months:  which he says . .  a pastime whereunto he was never accustomed in the cloister.  If your Grace would witsaffe to write iij. words to the said Archbishop showing him, what so ever has been written, you do take him for the Kings faithful servant and your lovare, your Grace should greatly comfort him.  The Datarye and he may do all: and therefore it shallbe well done to entertain him, for the Popis nuntio there wrytythe still many mad matters: and of every word your Grace speaks, making tanquam ex musca elephantem.  If orators would they might upon like ocasion fall now and then paper lefis:  I for my part thank it not necessary: and to say the trowgh I have no great occasion so to do.  The Popis Holiness was once determined to have sent the Datary to the Emperor, and the Bishop of Worchester to the Kings Highness, but since his mind is changed, and determined to send to neither, unto such time as his Holiness shall be resolute determined what he will do upon every particular point.  Which thing he says he cannot well do, till he shall have word again from the Emperor; that done, he will send unto both resolutely and perfectly instructed parsons.  My lord of Worchester was on his journey as far as Bononye before he was contremanded.  I have obtained him license, at his desire, to go see the King’s Highness, your Grace, and his bishopriche, in hope that he will do as much for me at his coming unto your Grace: and so he goes forth in his journey fair and softly, and not making speed, for he has no commission as yet.
  The Duke of Albany has been evil handled here amongst the Colonies, who has had many skirmishes with him, and caused him to fly from place to place, and much a do he has had to escape; part of his men were driven hard to Rome gates, and slain ij.C. of them within a mile of the town, and many followed and pursued in to Rome hard to the Popis palace, and of them taken prisoners within a stones cast of the same palace; where at the Pope was very evil discontented.  And I assure your Grace, had it not been, that the Pope has respect, by cause he is within the londis of the Church by the Popis sufferance, and in a manner with safe conduct and promise of safe going and coming as the Emperos men have, I think he had been the Kings Highness prisoner this day.  Wherein I have spared no labors no . . . . tion, no other setting forwards as well to the Popis Holiness; showing unto his Holiness that he sh . . .  so greatly ponder the duke of Albany, who now, . . .  the matters of France being in decay, was not be taken but as an abject parson:  as also  . . .  the colonies offering them large sums of money if they delivered him me.  And I assure your Grace they have somewhat vexed him and his men, but the Pope thinking he came do no less than help to save the Duke for the cause above said, by cause he married his kinswoman; and so the said duke by the Popis means, has licensed his footmen and many of his men of armies. . . .  rest shall take shipping at Civita Vetula her, and so in to France, if the Emperors army at Jean, being warned thereof, do not stop him by the way.  The said Duke is bare of money; he sent hether lately to borrow on C. ducattes of a friend of his, and sped not.  Thus our lord be thanked, the Kings enemies on every side be punished:  a domino factum est istud, et est mirabile in oculis nostris.
  At this present time I come from the Pope, where I learned nothing but that his Holiness should have advise (howbeit of no certainty) that Madame the French Kings mother, is determined to go her self to the Emperor; partly to move, as mother, the more pity in her sons calamity; partly by cause she thinking her self most best skilled to handle and treat this matter with the Emperor.  His Holiness said, that he thought the matter had need of other help, than of women’s tears.  This the almighty god preserve your Grace.  At Rome the     day of March.
  Post script.
  At this present hour I have received your Grace’s Letters of the xxiiij of February, concerning particular matters of certain prelates of Scotland, wherein I shall speak with the Popis Holiness; and procure with diligence, that they may have their full intent according to your Grace’s desire.  As touching the Bishop of Dunkell is matter, I have written unto your Grace thereof in my last Letters, and I am about to get the fryar heir somewhat of the Pope for your sake, that he may resign the pention he has assigned him upon the bishopriche of Dunkell.
  Of the Archibishop of Saint Andrews I have spoken so much evil already, that I . . . go study how I may now conveniently speak w . . . notwithstanding I am glad your Grace has recom ...him, for the Duke of Albany lately was demanded .. on, whom he took for his friend, what he would do now as the World was thus turned; he answered that he would in to France, where he could not lake an honorable entertainment in this great scarcity of noble men and great captains; and after that w . . demanded again what he would do if that entertainment should fail him, as peradventure it might; then the said duke said he would in to Scotland, where he said he had friends, and reckoned the Archbishop of Saint Andrews to be on of the chief.  But it should seem now that me makes his reckoning amiss, and so I will show the Pope; and I am sure his Holiness will be right well contented with all, and make such demonstration in the said Archbishop’s cause that he shall right well know that he farythe nothing the wars for the Kings Highness and your Grace is recommendation:  so, that the said Archbishop shall have greatly to esteem the same.  The Bishop of Dunkell his servant is come; and I do the best I can to help and assist him in his masters causes, according your Grace’s commandment.  I have also received the Kings Letters in recommendation of the Bishop of Murray and the abbey of Paslaye.  The Kings letters for the Archbishop of Saint Andrews I have not yet received, and, amongst a great number of Scotsmen here in the town, here is none that have any commission from the said Archbishop, but favorite rather the Archbishop of Glasco his adversary.
  This the Almighty God preserve your Grace.  At Rome the xix day of March
        Your Grace is humble chaplain and bedman,
              JO. CLERK.

Lady Brian, Governess of the Lady Elizabeth, to Lord Cromwell, from Hunsdon, for Instructions concerning her, after the death of Q. Anne her mother.
unknown
unknown
background: This Letter has been already printed by Stripe, but with a material omission, and in so imperfect a form, that it stands here at least in a more authentic shape.  Unfortunately it suffered much injury in the fire of the Cottonian Library in 1731, so that in a few places the Editor has been obliged to supply the lacunæ.  In this service Stripe’s copy has been called in aid. Queen Elizabeth’s manners when a child, form no uninteresting portion of this Letter.
  My Lord, after my most burden duty, I recommend me to your good Lordship beseeching you to be good Lord to me, now in the greatest need that ever . . . for it has pleased God to take from him that was my most con . . . in this world to my great heavens.  Jesus have mercy on her soul an . . . I am sokerles and as a redles creature both only for the great tr . . . . have in the Kings grace and your good lordship for now in yo . . .  I put all my whole trust of comfort in this world beseeching you to lo . . . me that I may so do.
  My Lord, when your Lordship was last here, it pleased you to say, that I should not mistrust the Kings Grace, nor your Lordship which word was more comfort to me than I can write, as God knows.  And now it boldens me to show you my poor mind.  My Lord, when my Lady Mary Grace was born, it pleased the Kings Grace to appoint me Lady Mistress; and made me a Baroness.  And so I have been am . . . . .  to the Children his Grace have had sense.
  Now it is so, my Lady Elizabeth is put from that degree she was afore:  and what degree she is at now, I know not but be hearing say; therefore I know not how to order her, nor myself, nor none of hers that I have the rule of:  that is, her women & her grooms:  beseeching you to be good Lord to my Lady, & to all hers:  And that she may have some rayment; for she has neither gown nor girdle, nor petticoat, nor no manner of linen for smokes, nor kerchiefs, nor sleeves, nor rayls, nor body-stitches, nor handkerchiefs, nor mufflers, nor begens.  All this her Graces Mostake, I have driven of as long as I can, that, be my trothe, I cannot drive it no longer:  beseeching you, my Lord, that you will see, that her Grace may have that is needful for her, as my Trust is you well do.  Beseeching you, my own good Lord, that I may know from you be writing, how I shall order my self; & what is the Kings Graces pleasure, & yours, that I shall do in everything.  And whatsoever it shall please the Kings Grace, or your Lordship to command me at all times, I shall follow it, to the best of my power.
  My Lord, Mr. Shelton says he is Master of this House:  what fashion that shall be, I cannot tell:  for I have not seen it afore.  My Lord, you be so honorable yourself, & every man reports your Lordship loves honor, that I trust your Lordship will see this House honorably ordered, how some ever it has been aforetime and if it please you, that I may know, what your Order is, & if it be not performed, I shall certify to your Lordship of it.  For I fear me, it will be hardly inow performed, for if the head of . . . . . . . . . .  knew, what honor means, it will be the better ordered:  if not, it will be hard to bring it to pass.
  My Lord, master Shelton would have my Lady Elizabeth to dine & sup every day at the board of Astat.  Alas! my Lord, it is not meant for a child of her age, to keep such rule yet.  I promise you, my Lord, I dare not take it upon me to keep her Grace in health & she keep that rule:  for there she shall see diverse meets & fruits, and wine:  which would be hard for me to refrain her Grace from it.  You know, my Lord, there is no place of correction there.  And she is yet to young to correct greatly.  I know well, & she be there I shall never bring her up to the Kings Graces honor, nor hers; nor to her health, nor my poor honesty.  Wherefore I show your Lordship this my discharge, beseeching you, my Lord, that my Lady may have a mess of meat to her own lodging, with a good dish or two, that is meat for her Grace to eat of:  And the reversion of the mess shall satisfy all her women, a gentleman usher & a groom.  Which been eleven persons on her side.  Sure I am, it will be (in to right little) as great profit to the Kings Grace this way, as the other way.  For if all this should be set abroad, they must have three or four mess of meat, where this one mess shall suffice them all, with bread & drink, according as my Lady Marie Grace had afore; & to be ordered in all things, as her Grace was afore.
  God knows, my Lady has great pain with her great teeth, & they come very slowly forth: & cause me to suffer her Grace to have her will more than I would; I trust to God & her teeth were well graft, to have her Grace after another fashion, than she is yet:  so as I trust the Kings Grace shall have great comfort in her Grace.  For she is as toward a Child, & as gentle of conditions, as ever I knew one in my life.  Jesus preserve her Grace.  As for a Day, or two at a hay team, or whatsoever it shall please the Kings Grace to have her set abroad, I trust so to endeavor me, that she shall so do as shall be to the Kings honor, & hers: and then after to take her ease again.
  I think master Shelton will not be content with this.  He may not know it is my desire; but that it is the Kings pleasure, & yours it should be so.  Good my Lord, have my Ladys Grace & us that be her poor Servants in your remembrance.  And your Lordship shall have our hearty prayers by the Grace of Jesus:  however preserve your Lordship with long life, & as much honor as your noble heart can desire.  From Honsdon with the evil hand of her that is your daily bed-woman.
            MARGET BRYAN.
  I beseech you, my own good Lord, be not miscontent, that I am so bold to write thus to your Lordship.  But I take God to my judge, I do it of true heart, and for my discharge.  Beseeching you, except my good mind.
  To the right noble, & my single good Lord my Lord
  Prive Sel, be this delivered.
  Lord Cromwell to King Henry the Eighth.  A Letter from his Prison in the Tower.
  Most gracious King and most merciful Sovereign, Your most humble most obedient and most bounden subject and most lamentable servant & prisoner, prostrate at the feet of your most excellent Majesty, have heard your pleasure by the mouth of your Comptroller, which was that I should write to your most excellent Highness such things as I thought might to be written concerning my most miserable state and condition; for the which your most abundant goodness, benignite, and license, the Immortal God, Three and On, rewards your Majesty.
  And now most gracious Prince to the matter.  First where I have been accused to your Majesty of Treason, to that I say I never in all my life thought willingly to do that thing that might or should displease your Majesty; and much less to do or say that thing which of it self is so high and abominable offence as God knows, who I doubt not shall rule the truth to your Highness.  My accusers your Grace know; God forgive them.  For as I ever have had love to your honor, person, life, prosperity, health, wealth, Joy, and Comfort, and also your most dear and most eternal beloved son the Prince his Grace, and your proceedings, God so help me in this my adversity; and confound me if ever I thought the contrary; what labors, pains, and trails I have taken according to my most bounden duty God also knows; for if it were in my power as it is Gods to make your Majesty to live ever young and prosperous, God knows I would; if it had been or were in my power to make you so rich as you might enrich all men, God help me as I would do it; if it had been or were in my power to make your Majesty so pusaunt as all the world should be compelled to obey you, Christ he knows I would; for so am I of all other most bound; for your Majesty has been the most bountiful Prince to me that ever was King to his subject; you are more like a dear father, your Majesty not offended, then a master.  Such has been your most grave and godly counsels towards me at sundry times.  In that I have offended I ask you mercy.  Should I now for such exceeding goodness, benygnyte, liberty, & bounty, be your traitor, nay then the greatest payness were to little for me; Should any faction or any affection to any point make me a traitor to your Majesty, then all the devils in hell confound me, and the vengeance of God light upon me, if I should once have thought it.  Most gracious Sovereign Lord to y remembrance I never spoke with the Chauncelor of the Augmentations and Throgmerton together at one time; but if I did I am sure I spoke never of any such matter; and your Grace know what manner of man Throgmerton has ever been towards your Grace, and your proceedings; and what master Chaunceler has been towards me God and he best knows.  I will no can accuse him.  What I have been towards him your Majesty right well know.  I would to Christ I had obeyed your often most gracious grave counsel and advertisements; then it had not been with me as now it is.  Yet our Lord, if it be his will, can do with me as he did with Susan who was falsely accused; unto the which God I have only committed my soul; my body and goods at your majesties pleasure, in whose mercy and piety I do holy repose me; for other hope then in God and your Majesty I have not.  Sir as to your Common wealth I have after my wit, power, and knowledge, traveled herein, having had no respect to persons (your Majesty only except) and my duty to the same; but that I have done any injustice or wrong willfully, I trust God shall bare me witness, and the world not able justly to accuse me.  And yet I have not done my duty in all things as I was bound, wherefore I ask mercy.  If I have heard of any combinations, conventicles, or such as were offenders of your laws I have, though not as I should have done, for the most part revealed them, and also caused them to be punished, not of malice as God shall judge me.  Nevertheless, Sir, I have meddled in so many matters under your Highness, that I am not able to answer them all; but one thing I am well assured of, that wittingly and willingly I have not had will to offend your Highness; but hard it is for me or any other, meddling as I have done, to live under your Grace and your laws but we must daily offend: and where I have offended I most humbly ask mercy & pardon at your gracious will and pleasure.  Amongst other things, most gracious Sovereign, master Comptroller showed me that your Grace showed him that within this xiiij days you committed a matter of great secrecy which I did reveal contrary to your expectations.  Sir I do remember well the matter, which I never revealed to any creature; but this I did, Sir, after your Grace had opened the matter first to e in your Chamber and declared your lamentable fate, declaring the things which your Highness myslykyd in the Queen, at which time I showed your Grace that she often desired to speak with me but I durst not, and you said why should I not, alleging that I might do much good in going to her, and to be playing with her in declaring my mind.  I thereupon lacking opportunity, not being a little grieved, spoke privately with her Lord Chamberlain, for the which I ask your Grace mercy, desiring him, not naming your Grace to him, to find some means that the Queen might be induced to order your Grace pleasantly in her behavior towards you; thinking thereby for to have had some fawtis amended to your Majesties comfort.  And after that, by general words, the said lord Chamberlain and other of the Queens Counsel being with me in my Chamber at Westminster for license for the departure of the strange maidens, I then required them to counsel their masters to use all pleasantness to your Highness, the which things undoubtedly were both spoken before your Majesty committed the secret matter unto me, only of purpose that she might have been induced to such pleasant and honorable fashions as might have been to your Grace’s comfort; which above all things as God knows I did most covet and desire.  But that I opened my mouth to any creature after your Majesty committed the secrecy thereof to me, other than only to my Lord Admiral, which I did by your Grace’s commandment, which was upon Sunday last in the morning, whom I then found as willing and glad to seek remind for your comfort and consolation, and saw by him that he did as much lament your Highness fate as ever did man; and was wonderfully grieved to see your Highness so troubled; wishing greatly your comfort, for the attaining whereof he said, your honor salvaged, he would spend the best blood in his belye, and if I would not do the like, you and willingly die for your comfort, I would I were in hell; and I would I should receive a thousand deaths.  Sir this is all that I have done in that matter and if I have offended your Majesty therein, prostrate at your Majesties feet I most lowly ask mercy and pardon of your Highness.  Sir there was also laid unto my charge at my examination that I had retained contrary to your laws.  Sir, what exposition may be made upon retainers I know not, but this will I say if ever I retained any man but such only as were my household servants, but against my will, God confound me.  But most gracious Sovereign I have been so called on and sewyd to by them that said they were my friends, that constrained thereunto I resayved their children and friends not as retainers, for their fathers & parents did promise to find them, and so took I them not as retainers to my great charge, and for none evil as God best knows, interpret to the contrary who will; most humbly beseeching your Majesty of pardon if I have offended therein.  Sir I do knowledge myself to have been a most miserable and wretched sinner, and that I have not towards God and your Highness behaved my self as I ought and should have done:  for the which my offences to God, while I live, I shall continually call for his mercy; and for my offences to your Grace, which God know were never malicious nor willful, and that I never thought treason to your Highness, your Realm, or Posterity, so God help me, either in word or deed.  Nevertheless, prostrate at your Majesties feet in what thing soever I have offended I appeal to your Highness for mercy, grace, and pardon, in such ways as shall be your pleasure; beseeching the almighty Maker and Redeemer of this World to send your Majesty continual and long health, wealth, and prosperity, with Nestor’s years to reign; and your most dear Son the Prince Grace to prosper, reign, & continue long after you; and they that would contrary, short life, shame, & confusion.  Writing with the quaking hand and most sorrowful heart of your most sorrowful subject and most humble servant & prisoner this Saturday at your of London.
                THOMAS CRUMWELL.

Queen Mary to the Bp. of Winchester, Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, for the restoration of Popery.
unknown
unknown
  Right reverend Father in God, right trusted & right well beloved, we greet you well.  And where among diverse other Inconveniences & Miss orders brought in & set further in that our University of Cambridge, one of the greatest & chief occasion of many of the said Miss orders is, that without sufficient authority, only upon the sensual mindes & rash determinations of a few Men, the ancient Statutes, Foundations, & Ordinances of the whole University, the Colleges & other places of Students, have been much altered, broken, & almost utterly subverted; whereby not only the last Wills of many good men have been broken, & many wise, politic, & godly Ordinances, confirmed by Parliaments & by sundry our Progenitors, fondly & irreverently contempt, but the consciences of many hones men, which by there others were bound to the observation of the said Statutes & Foundations, have been much encumbered, & yought loosely & insolently brought up, to the great discredit of the University, & no small hindrance of the Commonwealth of all our Realm:  We therefore, knowing it our burden duty to Almighty God, by whose only goodness we acknowledge ourselves called & placed in the Royal Estate of this Realm, to travel by all the means we may, that his Glory & holy Will being truly declared to all our Subjects, he may, of all sorts, in their several vocations, be reverently feared, served, & obeyed, have thought good for a beginning, to wish that the examples hereof, my first begin in our Universities, where young men, and all sorts of students, joining godly conversations with their studies in Learning may after, as well by their doings as by their preachings, instruct & confirm the rest of our subjects, both in knowledge & fear of Almighty God, in the due Obedience towards us, our laws, & all others their superiors, & in their charitable demeanor towards all men.  And because we know that when order is not kept, all things grow to confusion, we therefore have thought good to will & require you, our Chauncellour, & all others the Heads & Governors of the Colleges, & other Houses, that both yourselves for your own parts do exercise your offices, & live, & cause all Scholars, Students, Servants & Ministers, with others living under you, of what sort, state or condition so ever their be, to live, & frame themselves, their studies, conversations & manner of living, in such form & order, as by the ancient Statutes, Foundations & Ordinances of that our University, & of the Colleges, & others, is to you severally appointed, which Statutes & Foundations, we will to be inviolable kept & observed, according to the ancient Foundations & Ordinances of the Founders, & Grants of our Progenitours; & therefore do eftesones require & charge you our Chauncellour, whom we do authorize by these presents, for that purpose, to see the same well & truly observed, as you will answer for the contrary, Notwithstanding any Injunctions, or new Ordinances made, set further, or delivered by any Visitors or others, since the death of our Father of most worthy memory King Henry the eighth, (whom God assoyle) or any other new devices to the contrary hereof.  Given under our signet at our manner of Richmond this xxth. of August, the first year of our Reign.

Archbishop Parker to Sir William Cecil, concerning the foundation of a Grammar School at Sandwich in Kent.  A. D. 1563.
unknown
unknown
  Where of late, I made a request by letters, to your honor, for the obtaining of the Counsels letters in that cause opened unto you:  now I would be a suitor to the Queens majesty, by your favorable furtherance, for the behalf of the Town of Sandwich, concerning her Highness license, as well to the Dean and Chapter for their alienation, or rather a lease in fee farm of a rude acre of ground belonging to their Church, whereon the town would build a grammar School:  Mr. Manwood being so well disposed thereto, that he is fully determined to give to that foundation xx. li. by year imperpetuum of his own possessions presently.  The Dean and Chapter (whom I have particularly solicited) be well willing of their grant, staying only at the queens license:  the Town itself wholly bent to the erection:  Mr. Manwood his land ready for assurance.  The opportunity being such, I doubt not of the Queens Majesties good and gracious assent: as I have learned by experience by my own suit to her highness, for the recovery of the stipend of the Schoolmaster at Stoke college; perceiving then her godly zeal to the furtherance of learning, yes in that case, where the Stipend went out of her own coffers.  This rare example of so godly foundation in Mr. Manwood, a man of his vocation, who be commonly judged rather to employ all their abilities to their own posterities, then to such common respects; and he being not without issue, (and is daily like to have more) might have followed the common example, in leaving the gains of his time to his offspring.  And therefore I would wish his purpose were savored, both for example to others, as also to put away the common judgment which runs upon such as be of his calling.  I take it to be a motion of God, in consideration that we poor Bishops be now able to succeed our predecessors in their so liberal foundations.  Now you, such as you be and as Mr. Manwood is, must lay hand to the furtherance of such public endowments, or else you be not like to leave to your Successors which you have received of your Ancestors.
  For that I would have a view partly of the ground and situation thereof, (and for other causes) I (this last Sunday morning) rode farther from my house, and was there by vij. of the clock; the rather so soon, to prevent their civility of receiving, (as the manner is) and partly to be present at their whole Service.  But in the first consideration they prevented me:  for, though the morning was very foul and rainy, yet I found the Mayor and his Jurattes ready at the town gate to accompany me to my lodging, and so to the church, being men of honest civility, and comely, grave parsonages of good understanding:  their streets (as they might be for the straightness of them) clean, and not much savagery, their service song in good distinct harmony, and quiet devotion.  The singing men, being the Mayor and the Jurattes with the head men of the town, placed in the choir fair and decent, in so good order as I could wish.  My Auditory great and attentive to hear, and also to understand the Queens pleasure in publication of the General Prayer and Fast: that I see not but the Queens majesty shall have of them good subjects & true Orators.  And furthermore, upon the erection of this School; her Highness shall have a number of young tender hands lift up in prayer for her Highness prosperous Reign.  The Strangers there, being very godly in the Sabbath day, and busy in their work on the week day, and their quietness such as the Mayor and his Brethren have no causes of variances coming before them.  As for other disorders reformable by ecclesiastical laws, I have before now deputed their Minister (a grave learned man) to exercise (by my authority) ecclesiastical censures as he shall see cause.  As hitherto little has been spied.  By all the premises aforesaid considered, I mean to commend the Towns request to the Queens favor, so laudable behaving themselves as I see them, and partly to express to you somepart of my joy which I have here by them in this outward corner of my diocess.  And therefore, I pray your Honor help them.  In so doing mercedem reportabis a Domino in resurrectione justorum, which God of his mercy make joyful to the Queen Highness and to us all.  From my house at Bekesbourne this xxvijth. day of August 1563.
            Your honors assured,
              MATTHUE CANTUAR.
  To the right honorable Sir William Cecil knight principal Secretary to the Queens majesty at the Court.

Christopher Jonson, Master of Winchester School, to Sir William Cecil, upon the perverseness of Rich.  Lyllington, one of his Scholars.
unknown
unknown
  The unceasing employ of Sir William Cecil’s mind while Secretary of State, can only be known to those whose researches lead them to the documents of his time.  From the question of Peace or War down to a regulation for the lining of slop-house; from quarrels at court to the bickering between a schoolmaster and his scholar; from the arrest of a Peer to the punishment of a cutpurse; all was reported to him, and by all parties in turn was his favor craved. Christopher Jonson, the writer of this Letter, became master of Winchester School in 1560.  Wood, in his Athenæ Oxonienses, describes him as a Latin poet, a philosopher, and  a physician.  He did not remain master of Winchester School for a great many years; but settled in London, and practiced as a physician in the parish of St. Dunstan in the West, where he died in 1597.
  Right honorable my duty with all humbleness considered:  I received of late your honors Letters in the behalf of one Richard Lyllington a scholar of mine: who if he had not spared the truth at his last being with your Honor, I am persuaded you would have spared his commendations unto me; not because I am not willing to obey your commandment either herein or in any other matter, but because I presume, of your justice and wisdom, that you would not willingly defend any such. The whole matter is thus, as at all times I ever found him very tumultuous and disobedient, so a little before his repair to your Honor, a pillage being committed amongst my scholars, and the suspicion falling vehemently upon him (beside his own confession) I happened to challenge him for the same; but he choosing rather to be expelled, as he said, then corrected for his fault, drove his knife at me which he had for the purpose provided, and standing at ward against me and our Subwarden, showed such an example of stubbornness to my scholars as these twenty years I have not heard the like.  Notwithstanding being apprehended and punished for this disorder, the same day he departed the College without license, but with such a threatening stomach, by report, as that I was advertised by my friends to beware of his secret malice.  The next time I saw him, he brought your Honors Letters; upon the sight whereof I received him again, though I perceived he had glossed altogether with you.  Since that time hitherto, he has continued in such overthwartness, as (were it not for your Honors sake) neither I nor the College could bear him.  That which we do in suffering his evil rule, I fear will prove to the animating of others farther than good order can abide.  This I beseek your honor consider of, and pardon me if toward such I discharge my vocation.  From the College by Winchester, the xvijth. of Msay.
          Your honors most due to command
            CHRISTOFER JONSON.

Edwin Sandys bishop of London to Lord Burghley, upon the News of the Massacre of St. Bartholomew.  Recommends measures for safety, with the BEHEADING of the Queen of Scots.
unknown
unknown
background: Lord Clarendon calls fifteen hundred and seventy-two “that infamous year,” from the barbarous and inhuman Massacre of Paris which took place in it, more usually, from the day on which the transaction occurred, called the Massacre of St. Bartholomew.  An event, he observes, attended and accompanied with as foul dissimulation and as horrid perjury as ever added deformity to wickedness. The Reader who would learn the minute particulars of this detested Tragedy may consult Davila’s History of the Civil Wars of France, the Memoirs of Margaret Queen of Navarre, the Memoirs of Sully, the Life of Theodore Agrippa d’Aubignè, Thuanus, Meze3ray’s History of France, Wraxhall’s History of the House of Valois, and Lingard’s narrative in a Note at the end of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. The Massacre of Paris was subsequently repeated in other towns.  Lingard has assembled the Dates; at Paris August the 24th; Meaux the 25th; La Charité, 26th; Orleans, 27th; Saumur and Angers,, 29th; Lyons, 30th; Troyes, September the 2d; Bourges, the 11th; Rouen, 17th; Romans, 20th; Toulouse, the 23d; Bourdeaux, October the 3d. The numbers of those who perished, and neither age nor sex were spared, are variously reckoned by different writers, from ten to a hundred thousand: but should we take the half of the lowest number, the deed loses nothing of its atrocity. It was the Editor’s first intention to have given all he could have found upon this Massacre, but the Correspondence was too long for the limits of his Work.  Much relating to it will be seen in Digge’s compleat Ambassador, although the Letters are imperfectly printed, and some of them have wrong dates. The Editor here contents himself with a single Letter, from Edwin Sandys bishop of London; from which, and from other Letters, it appears that the horror of this deed led even good men to fear that nothing but strong measures could prevent massacre from spreading through all parts of Protestant Europe.  The present Letter is evidence also that the first thought of beheading the Queen of Scots arose out of the panic of this very massacre, although four fourteen years the thought did not ripen into execution. Pope Gregory the Thirteenth had no sooner notice of this deed than he went in solemn procession to the Church of St. Louis in Rome, to return God thanks for it as for a happy victory, and sent a nuncio to France to congratulate the King.  Lord Clarendon thought that Gregory alone paid his devotions for it; but in France its anniversary was long celebrated.  William Cecil, writing to his grandfather Lord Burghley from Paris, 25th Aug. 1583, says, “Upon St. Bartelmewes day, we had here solemn Processions, and other tokens of triumphs and joy, in remembrance of the slaughter committed this time eleven years past.  But I doubt they will not so triumph at the day of Judgment.”
  These evil times trouble all good mens heads, and make their heart sake, fearing that this barbarous treachery will not cease in France, but will reach over unto us.  Neither fear we the mangling of our body, but we sore dread the hurt of our Head: for therein consists our life and safety.  We shall dutifully praise.  Give you good advise.  And God, I trust, will deliver us out of the mouth of the warring Lyon.  The Citizens of London in these dangerous days had need prudently to be dealt withal; the preachers appointed for the Cross in this vocation are but young men, unskillful in matters political, yet so carried with zeal that they will enter into them and pour further their opinions.  If the league stands firm betwixt her Majesty and the French King, (as I suppose it does,) they may perhaps, being not directed, utter speech to the breach thereof.  How that will be liked of I doubt.  If I may receive from your Lord some direction or advise herein, I will not fail to direct them so well as I can.  The Dean of Pauls and I will first occupy the place, giving example how others may follow.  Sundry have required a public Fast and Prayer to be had, for the confounding of these and other cruel enemies of Gods gospel; but this I will not consent unto, without warrant from Her Majesty.  Thus am I bold to unfold a piece of my mind on the sudden, and to make you pertaker of my simple cogitations, knowing that according to your old wont, you will take the same in good part.  Hasten her Majesty homeward, her safe return to London will comfort many hearts oppressed with fear.  God preserve you, and direct you with his spirit to counsel to his glory.  In haste from my house at Fulham this vth. of September 1572.
        Your Lords humble at commandment.
            ED. LONDON.

The safety of our Queen and Realm, if God will.
unknown
unknow
  1.  For with to CUT OF the SCOTTISH QUEEN’S heade:  ipsa est nostri fundi calamitas.
  2.  To remove from our Queen Papistes, and such as by private persuasion overthrow good counsel.
  3.  The Queen’s Majesty to be guarded strongly with Protestants, and others to be removed.
  4.  Order must be taken for the safe keeping of the Tower, and for good order to be had in London for strengthening of the City, and that they receive no Papistes of strength to sojourn there this winter.
  5.  A firm League to be made with the young Scottish King and the Protestant there.
  6.  A League to be made with the Princes Protestants of Germany, offensive and defensive.
  7.  The chief Papistes of this realm are to be shut up in the Tower, and the popishe old Bishops to be returned thither.
  8.  The Gospel earnestly to be promoted, and the Church not burdened with unnecessary ceremonies.
  9.  The Protestants, which only are faithful subjects, are to be comforted, preferred, and placed in authority, the Papistes to be displaced.
      These put in execution, would turn to God’s glory, the safety of
    the Queen’s Majesty and make the Realm flourish and stand.
  To the right honorable my singular good Lord the Lord of Burghley, high Treasurer of England.

The Earl of Sussex to the Lord Treasurer, upon the Queen’s wish to sign a Commission to execute by martial Law.
unknown
unknown
background: Camden, in his History of Queen Elizabeth, explains the intention of this Letter.  He says, “Whether I should here make mention of the frantic Opinion of Peter Burchet, I know not, who persuaded himself that it was lawful to kill such as opposed the truth of the Gospel.  So far had the error of this opinion transported him, that he drew his dagger upon Hawkins that famous sea-captain in the open street and wounded him, supposing him to be Hatton, who was then in great favor with the Queen, and of her Privy Council, whom he had heard to be an enemy to the Innovaters.  The Queen was so extraordinarily incensed with this fact, that she commanded the man to be presently executed by martial or camp-law, until she was informed by discreet persons that martial-law was not to be used but in camps, or in turbulent times; but that at home and in time of peace, the proceeding must be by form of judiciary process.  Being therefore indicated, he affirmed that what he had done was consonant to the holy Scriptures, and therefore lawful.  Whereupon being to be condemned of heresy, he promised to renounce his opinion; but yet he shifted it off, and would not.  Then being thrown into the Tower of London, he slew one of his keepers with a billet which he snatched up out of the chimney, knocking him on the head; for which he was condemned of murder, had his right hand cut off and nailed to the gallows, and then was hanged, discovering a silent reluctancy.”
  The Queen sat in the great Closet or Parlor.  She gave order to Mr. Secretary to bring to her the Commission for executing by marshal law to be signed at after dinner.  God put into her heart to do the best.  My Lord Admiral is greatly grieved with the speech that he should advise it, and is directly against it.  He told my Lord of Leicester of the execution done in London in the Rebellion of Wyatt, but he never told it to the Queen.  My Lord of Arundell is very vehement against it in speech to me.  The Queen asked for your Lordship, and seemed to look for you; being her birth it was holiday.  I told her the Judges did sit this day in the Exchequer, and in Westmester Hall, which it seemed she knew not before.  What will become of these acts at after dinner your Lordship shall her this night.  As I was at dinner, 28th October 1573.
            Your L. assured
              T. SUSSEX.
  To the right honorable & my very good L. the L. High Treasurer of England.

William Fleetwood, Recorder of London, to Lord Burleigh, on the manner of tanning Leather in the reign of Queen Elizabeth in different parts of England.
unknown
unknown
background: Some Observations on the Statute for Tanners, in the 5th of Elizabeth, occur in the Lansdowne volume, Num. 5. art. 58.  Whence it appears that of fifteen clauses only six could be kept, the rest were to be dispensed with, chiefly from the circumstance of the framers of the Act being totally ignorant of the Tanner’s art.
  Right honorable and my very good Lord, according to your Lordships order prescribed by your honorable letters I have conferred with certain persons of good calling and skill upon these Articles exhibited by certain Tanners, the which, though they be many and long, yet the principal griefs do consist in the first and the xth article: the one for the lymyng, the other for raising.  My Lord, such as I conferred with were of opinion against all these articles; and then I sent for a Tanner before us, who indeed did agree with many of the said articles; but my Lord, although my skill in tanning of Leather be small, yet for these xiij. years I have given my mind that way to understand of that faculty.  My wifes mother in Buckinghamshire was married unto a Tanner, whose name was William Howse of West Wickham; he died at Christmas last; he was lxxiiij. years of age; a man both of great wealth, very wise, and most skillful in his art; and such a one as made the best leather in this land, and sold it best cheap.  His desire was to serve the poor, and help young beginners.  He was a virtuous man.  My Lord he told me unto the time of his death, always, that it was impossible to make good leather according to the words of the law, and wished many times of God that the Law might be reformed.  And further my Lord I have viewed myself all the Tan-houses between Norham castle and Dover castle, and the most part of North Wales, and so up to Norwich, and I find that every country in tanning of Leather does vary one from an other: and yet they make, or, if they list can make very good leather.  It is hard to cause a Northern Tanner, or any other in his old days, to learn a new order of Tanning: and surely one form of Tanning can not be used in all places.  The Somersetshire hide being of a red heare will never make half so good leather as will the Derbyshire hide.  The Middlesex hide is not so good as the Vale hide, the which vale is within xxti miles of Middlesex.  The hides of most Countries do differ.  The waters do differ.  In some places the waters are too sharp and piercing, the which an ignorant Tanner does not discern.  The chalk waters of Chilton hills has no fellow.  Some never lime their hides, but work off the heare with strength of men, and that will be excellent leather.  My Lo. the house of Ashen bark drunk, is an extreme purgacion: even so it opens the raw hide, and does marvelous raise or puff it up.  The house of the Oken bark dronke, is the extremest binder that can be found in phisicke; and even so it binds the leather, the which is commendable.  All the excellency and conning of a Tanner consists in the skillful making of his house: surely they must be many and several, and one stronger than an other.  The time of the changing of the Leather from one house to another must be times at prescribed hours, or else the leather will be utterly spoiled.  My Lo. there be an infinite number of ruls to be observed in Tanning, the which few Tanners did ever conceive; much less the Parliament who conceived their information of such whom now I do by experience know not to be skillful.  My Lo. in February last the Tanners whose names be written under this bill of Articles set down these Articles for a remembrance to be provided for at the next Parliament.  Surely My Lo. I, amongst others unworthy, did argue with them, and found most of them very simple men in their Arte.  Wherefore my good Lo. if a toleration might be made by your Lordships good means until the Parliament come, I think it would do much good.  But surely I see not how Leather can become the better cheap, for here is a License much spoken of in London that men say is the only cause of the derthe.  Thus most humbly I take my leave of your good Lordship; this first of June 1575.
          Your good Lordships most bounden,
            W. FLETEWOOD,
              Recorder.
  To the right honorable and my very good Lord Treasurer of England.

Walter Earl of Essex to the Lord Treasurer, offering his eldest son to be married to his Lordship’s daughter.
unknown
unknown
  My very good Lord, because I have ever found in your lordship such love and favor towards me as I cannot any were fully require, I have therefore resolved to make you the offer of the most sufficient pledge of my good will, namely of the direction, education, and marriage of many eldest son whom if you can like to match with your daughter I will presently assure him two thousand marks per year in England, besides my houses, domains, and parks, I will give to your lordship one hundred pounds or two hundred marks by year for his education, I will assure to your daughter five hundred pounds by year in jointure, and, upon the marriage, depart with a convenient portion for their maintenance during my life; if at years of discretion the match shall not go forward, I will give to the gentelwoman to her marriage two thousand pounds.  And thus much in the behalf of my son.  From myself you shall most assuredly look and ever find as firm and constant friendship as your lordship shall receive by any other alliance in England; to all which points I gage my honor and faith, and have testified the like to the bearer to be uttered to your lordship as I do now also confirm it with my hand and seal.  Their is equality sufficient in their years, no great distance in neighbor between Tiboldes and Bonington, such an occasion might make me like well of my lands in Essex, where if God send me life I might hereafter show all offices of friendship to the good Countess your daughter, of whose match I mistrust not but your lordship shall in the end receive singular comfort.  Your lordship sees how open & plain I am; use me as it shall please you: and so with my most hearty commendations to my lady I take my leave.  At Knockfergus the first of November 1573
          at your lordships commandment
              W. ESSEX.
  To the right honorable my very good lord the lord Burleighe Lord Treasurer of England.

Edmund Bishop of Peterborough to Lord Burghley; upon the state of his Diocese, and the unruliness of the Puritans in it.
unknown
unknown
  My most humble commendations unto your honor premised, &c.  My very good Lord, I most entirely, in the name of Christ Jesus, beseech you (in whom under God and my prince is my only trust and stay) vouchsafe among your other cares of the state of this Realm to look upon these sheires of Northampton and Rutlande, committed in spiritual government unto me.  And for because God has blessed your counsels and devises ever to the wealth of this Realm, let it not grieve you to aid me with your counsel for the better discharge of my office, and peace of the country.  I am, without Gods assistance and yours, very weak and unable to execute and discharge the same in these troubles, now moved and procured by those whom men do call Puritans and their fautors.  They are grown apparently to neglect, if they do not abhor the divine service set out by public authority.  So that in the Town of Overston where Mr. Carleton dwells, there is no devine service upon most Sundays and holidays, according to the book of Commen Prayer, but in steed thereof ij sermons be preached most commonly by Mr. Standen, and one Mr. King, men for their opinions not licensed by me to preach at this day.  When they are determined to receive the communion they repair to Whiston, where it is their joy to have many owte of diverse parishes, principally out of Northampton Towne and Ovedrston aforesaid, with other towns thereabout, there to receive the sacraments with preachers and ministers to their own liking, and contrary to form prescribed by the public order of the Realm; which breeds in my opinion great scisme and division, with grudge and mallice among the people, so that I am doubtful, that further evil will ensue thereof.  To their purposes they have drawn diverse young ministers, to whom it is plausable to have absolute authority in their parrishes.  In their ways there be very bold and stout, like men that seem not to be without great friends.  Whoso stands against them, they seek to molest by some means, as lately my chauncellor, whom by endytementes very much, and yet more by clamors and reproaches openly in the face of the country the disquietted, professing not to be satisfied by any other means but by his departure out of the country; which, no doubt of it, would make well of their side and for their purpose, for if men by voices and clamors might be removed out of the way, which withstand their unlawful doings, I doubt not but that there will shortly have friends inowe, and few to resist their attempts.  I write not this to defend my chauncellor, if they be able justly before discreet and indifferent Judges to find him culpable, so that I would not have him to escape dew correction according to the quantity and quality of his fault; but I would be loath to have him permitted and given over ever to their pleasures.  And glad I would be that indifferent judges might have the hearing both of his adversaries offences and of his; before whom I trust he shall be found either in no fault at all, or else in such fault only as may well obtain forgiveness; if it be otherwise it shall not greave me, so that he suffer not more than he has deserved.  In this my chauncellores case I have to crave some aid to bring it to the just trial of the wise, as in my own causes aforesaid, I stand in great need of some direction from you, for since they are increased and waxen bold when I and my officers have been to resist them, much further will they proceed if I be destitute of a chauncellor.  When some of them have offended, I am written unto by those whose letters in mild words be unto me rather a commandment than a request.  Therefore I beseech you, as before I have done, to relieve me with some part of your counsel.  I would not thus trouble you, my good Lord, if this matter touched not as much the peace and quietness of the Laietie, as it does the regiment of the Spirituality; wherefore I beseech you pardon me, if in this anxiety and doubtfulness I fly unto you for advise.  At Peterborough this xiijt. of April 1573
          Your honors at commandment in the Lord Jesus
              EDMUNDE PETRIBURG.
  To the Right honorable my very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer of England.

Father Sanders the Jesuit, to the Catholic Nobility and Gentry of Ireland, to stir them to Rebellion.
unknown
unknown
  Camden has given an account of the expedition which in 1579 carried Father Sanders to Ireland.  He says, “In Munster, a Province of Ireland, James Fitz-Morris raised a new rebellion; the same James which a while before, falling upon his knees before Perott President of Munster, had with lamentable howlings and humble entreaties begged his pardon, and most religiously vowed his fidelity and obedience to the Queen.  This man (who was never well but in troubles) had withdrawn himself into France, promising the King that if he would assist him, he would unite all Ireland to the Sceptre of France, and restore the Romish religion in that Isle.  But being wearied out with delays and in the end laughed at, he went from France into Spain, and made the same promises to the Catholic King.  The King sent him over to the Bishop of Rome; from whom having (at the earnest solicitation of Sanders an English priest, and Allen an Irish one, both of them Doctors in Divinity) gotten a little money, the authority of a Legate granted to SANDERS, a consecrated banner, and letters of recommendation to the Spaniard, he returned into Spain, and from thence arrived about the first day of July, WITH THOSE TWO DIVINES, three ships, and a small body of men, at Saint Mary Wick (which the Irish contractedly call Smerwick) in Kerry, a peninsula in Ireland, where in a place solemnly consecrated by the Priests, he erected a Fort, and drew up his ships close under: which ships Thomas Courtney an English gentleman, who lay by chance at anchor with a man of war in a road hard by, soon after set upon, took, and carried away, and deprived the Spaniards of the benefit of the Sea.” One of the original printed Indulgences granted by the Pope on this occasion to those who should join the Irish rebels, preparatory to the expedition, is still preserved in the same Volume of the Lansdowne Collection with Father Sanders’s Letter; and bears date in 1577.  It is endorsed in Lord Burghley’s hand, “Bulla contra Reginam.  For JAM. FITZ-MORIS.”  It has at the bottom, a wafer Seal of one of the Cardinals, and is further attested by one of the apostolic Notaries.  The Letters J. H. S. at the beginning, have the Cross above and the Nails below, encircled with a Glory.
  Pits, who was related to Father Sanders, places his death in 1581.  Camden, in 1583.  Whether he perished of cold and hunger, or died of disease is uncertain. To the right honorable and Catholic Lords and Worshipful Gentlemen of Ireland, N. Sander D. of Divinity wishes all felicity. Pardon me, I beseech you, if upon just cause I use the same words to your Honors and Worships which S. Paule wrote sometime to the Galatians: ‘Who has enchanted you, not to obey the Truth?’ for if you be not bewitched, what mean you to fight for hearsay against the true faith of Christ, for the Devil against God, for Tyrans that rob you of your goods, lands, lives, and everlasting salvation, against your own brethren, who daily spend their goods and shed their blood to deliver you from these miseries?  What mean you I say, to be at so great charges, to take so great pains, and to put yourselves in so horrible danger of body and soul, for a wicked Woman, neither begotten in true wedlock nor esteeming her christendom, and therefore deprived by the Vicar of Christ, her and your lawful judge; forsaken of God who justifies the sentence of his Vicar; forsaken of all Catholic Princes whom she has injuried intolerably; forsaken of diverse Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of England, who ten years past took the sword against her, and yet stand in the same quarrel?  See you not that she is without a lawful heir of her own body, who may either reward her friends or revenge her enemies?  See you not that she is such a shameful reproach to the royal Crown, that who so is indeed a friend to the Crown should so much the more hasten to dispossess her of the same?  See you not that the next Catholic heir to the Crown (for the Pope will take order by God’s grace that it shall rest in none other but Catholics) must account all them for traitors that spend their goods in maintaining an heretike against his true title and right?  What will you answer to the Pope’s Lieutenant when he bringing us the Popes and other Catholic Princes aid (as shortly he will) shall charge you with the crime and pain of heretiks, for maintaining an heretical pretense Queen against the public sentence of Christ’s vicar?  Can she with her fine Supremacy (which the Devil instituted in Paradise, when [he] made Eve Adams mistress in Gods matters) absolve and acquiet you from the Pope’s excommunication and curse?  Shall you not rather stay yourselves and your noble Houses with the suspicion of Hearsay and Treason? in which case if the Catholic heir to the royal Crown call upon the execution of the Laws of the Church, you shall for the maintenance of hearsay loose your goods, your lands, your honors, and undo your wives, your children, and your Houses forever.  God is not mocked.  The longer it is before he punish, the more hard and severe shall his punishment be.  Do you not see before your eyes that because King Henry the Eighth broke the Unity of Christ’s Church his House is now cut off, and ended? and think you that maintaining the Hearsay which he began, you shall not bring your own houses to the like end that his has?  Mark likewise Sir William Druries end, who was the General against the Pope’s army, and think not our part to weak, seeing God fights for us.  And surely whereas we had once both money, men, and armor to begin this battle withall; God, by most strange means (which to recite in this place it were to tedious) took them all from us, and sent us hether in manner naked, to the end it should be evident unto all the World that this war is not the war of man (which is always most pursuant in the beginning as most Armies, begun with greater power then afterward it is maintained,) but the War of God, who of small beginnings works wonderful end.  Whom I beseech to open your eyes, that, whiles time is, you may openly confess and honor him more than Heretikes.  The xxj. of Feb. 1580.

B. C. an English Spy to his Government upon the preparation of the Spanish Armada.
Madrid 
28 May 1588.
  My last was out of this town of the last of April which I sent by way of Italy, not having better commodity for the place and time, which, presently, is full suspicions.  This do I send by the way of Lion, which perhaps may arrive before the other.  My Journey into Portugal, and the money I left to one there, cost me much, as in my former I wrote; since which I have had more particular advises as herein I send you.  And although I judge this Navy (now in a readiness under the castle of Belem expecting wind to set sail) may be in your quarters before these come to your hands, yet would I omit no occasion to write, saying that where heretofore I was in the number of the incredulous, yet now being in place where I may here and see, I confess to be in the wrong; for now I am out of doubt they will in very did that way: so that the Lightening and Thunder clap will be both in a moment.
  From Dunkirk is lately come to Lisbon a small ship with good speed, having passed in vij days; she brings from the Duke of Parma certain pilots for the conduct of this Army, and says that upon all the coast of our land she never saw one sail, and further avows that the said Duke much solycytethe the departure of the Armata.  The news here from Constantinople are, and that duplicate, how Ebrami Bassha, general of the seas, is to issue with a hundred galleys, and that these Governors of Thunis, Tripoli, and Algier, with others of the coast of Barbary, have in readiness fifty more to join with him; whereby is expected great spoils upon the coasts of this King’s dominions; to the best remedy whereof that presently may be, is ordained horsemen, and the prince made general of those seas puts in order eighty galleys to follow and to annoy them; accounting that in October they must of force retire.
  About xvj months ago was taken a Youth entringe Spain our of France, about Fontarabie, who has given out his person to be begotten between our Queen and the Earl of Leicester; born at Hampton court, and further with by the eldeer Assheley delivered into the hands of one Southern the servant to Mrs. Assheley, with charge upon pain of death that the said Southern should not reveal the matter, but bring it up; who brought the babe to a millers wife of Mowlsey to give it suck, and afterwards the said Southern going into his country which was Wurcester or Shropshier, carried with him the child, and there brought it up in learning and qualities.  In the end, discovering unto this youth the whole secret, he took a flight over seas, where many years he has remained until his coming here.  His name is Arthur, and of xxvij years of age, or there about.  This forsoothe is his saying, and takes upon him like to the man he pretends to be; whereupon he wanted no keepers, and is very solemnly warded and served, with an expence to this King of vj crowns a day.  If I had my Alphabet I would say more touching his lewd speeches; and if I may I will do him pleasure, especially being called to account about him, as it is told me I shall shortly be; the king being informed that about that time I served in Court, whereby I may say somewhat to this matter.
  Here in this town and country are great prayers, processions, fastings, and almes, for the happy success of this Armata, in this cause of God now more than ever in hand.  I hope you there will join with us here in heart and spirit in such sort as ones we may meet at home with the sure enjoying of the true catholic religion in our country; whereof we may now the better hope, seeing our Queen is said here to have sent Batson the Ihesuyte to Rome about overture with his Holiness to be reconciled, which God grant, and always preserve you.  Madrid the xxviijth of May 1588.
                Yours to use.
                  B. C.

The Queen to the Marquis of Winchester and the Earl of Sussex, Lieutenants of the County of Southampton, TO PREPARE AGAINST INVASION.
unknown
unknown
background: By the Queen.
    ELIZABETH R.
  Right trusty, and right well beloved cousins we greet you well.  Whereas heretofore upon the advertisements, from time to time and from sundry places, of the great preparations of foreign forces, made with a full intent to invade this our Realm and other our dominions, we gave our directions unto you for the preparing of our Subjects within your Lievetennauncies to be in readiness for defense against any attempt, that might be made against us and our Realm, which our directions we find so well performed, that we cannot but receive great contentment thereby, both in respect of your careful proceedings therein, and also of the great willingness of our people in general, to the accomplishment of that whereunto they were required.  Showing thereby their great love, and loyalty towards us, which as we accept most thankfully at their hands, acknowledge ourselves infinitely bound to Almighty God, in that it has pleased him to bless us with so loving and dutiful Subjects: so would we have you make it known unto them on our behalf, forasmuch as we find the same intention not only of invading, but of making a conquest also of this our Realm, now constantly more and more detected, and confirm as a matter fully resolved on (an Army being already put to the Seas for that purpose which we doubt not but by gods goodness, shall prove frustrate), we have therefore thought meet, to will, and require you forthwith, with as much convenient speed as you may, to call together at some convenient place or places the best sort of gentlemen under your Lievetennancie, and to declare unto them that considering these great preparations and arrogant threatnings now burst out in action upon the Seas, tending to a conquest, wherein every mans particular state is in the highest degree to be touched, in respect of Country, Liberty, Wife, Children, lands, life, and that which specially to be regarded, for the profession of the true and sincere Religion, of Christ; and laying before them the infinite and unspeakable miseries, that follow upon any such accident and change (which miseries are evidently seen by the fruits of the hard and cruel government that is holden in Countries not far distant, where such change does happen, whatsoever pretence is otherwise given forth for the cause of Religion) we do look that the most part of them should have, upon this instant extraordinary occasion a larger proportion of furniture, both for horsemen and footmen (but especially horsemen) then have been certified, thereby to be in their best strength against any attempt what soever, and to be employed both about our own person and otherwise, as they shall have knowledge given unto them, the number of which larger proportion as soon as you shall know, we require you to signify to our privy Counsel, hereunto as we doubt not but by your good endeavors, they will be the rather conformable, So all so we assure ourselves, that Almighty God will be bless their loyal hearts born towards us their loving Sovereign and their natural Country, that all the attempts of any enemies whatsoever shall be made voiced and frustrate, to their confusion, your comforts, and to Gods high glory.  Given under our signet at our manor of Greenwich the xviijth. day of June 1588, in the xxxth. year of our Reign.
                  WINCHESTER.

Thomas Wilson, to Sir Thomas Parry at Paris.  The State of England immediately after King James’s Accession.
Greenwich
June 12, 1603
  Our English affairs go on with a smooth pace and a smiling countenance, God grant them good continuance.  Our virtuous King makes our hopes to swell.  His actions suitable to the time and his natural disposition.  Sometimes he comes to Counsel, but most time he spends in Fields and Parks and Chases, chasing away idleness by violent exercise and early rising, wherein the Sun seldom prevents him.  The people according to the honest English nature approve all their Prince’s actions and words, saving that they desire some more of that gracious affability which there good old Queen did afford them.  He is at the present at Windsor having viewed all his houses, and at that he purpose to entertain his Queen and Son, who about fourteen days hence are there expected. For matters de facto, domestic, I shall not write much till the Coronation and Parliament be past.  Only, for gaining the love of the People there are many things in the meanwhile done, as taking away of all Monopolies, and other matters reformed where private gain has caused public grievance.  Our merchants which trade for Levant have on Sunday last given over their patent, and the King has released their yearly pension of 4000l. per annum.
    Your Lordship’s most devoted and affectionate in all service or command,
              THO. WILSON.

Nicholas Charles to Sir Robert Cotton, upon the Creation of the new Nobility called Baronets.
unknown
unknown
Sir Oliver Lambert, says Betham, having reduced the Province of Ulster in Ireland, the King, in order to preserve it in subjection, and to encourage a plantation therein by the English, instituted the hereditary dignity of Baronet, May 11th. 1611.  The persons upon whom this honor was bestowed engaging singly to maintain thirty foot soldiers in Ireland for three years, at the rate of eight pence English by the day; and to pay the first year’s wages into the Exchequer at one payment, upon passing their patents; which, with fees of honor, amounted to near Twelve Hundred Pounds. With the precise circumstances of the discussion alluded to in the present Letter, the Editor is unacquainted.
  Right worshipful Sir, my duty remembered, I have made bold to trouble you with this Script, containing some of the occurrences and business of the Baronettes since your going out of town.  The matter has been heard on both sides, wherein by the Baronettes was showed the promiscuous using of Baronett and Bannarett, and their proofs held for little and nothing worth, being accounted Monkish Stories; and so made but a mistake in all ages.  Withal it was urged that if they could show a Baronett made formerly, and afterward corruptly called a Bannarett, that then it were a good instance to prove them all one.  This and some other such like arguments, too long to be written, were used of either part on two several days of hearing, and the last day it seemed to lean toward the Baronettes side, that they should be declared Bannerettes; but with proviso to give place unto Barons younger sons; and we have delivered in a note to the Lords of the Privileges & Immunities of a Bannarett, but what they will allow I cannot yet hear of: but on Saturday next the final determination is expected, if some troublesome Sprit do not hinder it; which end I wish were well made, & am glad that you are not seen in it at this time.  And no doubt it will be to the Content of you and other understanding gentlemen.  Thus wishing to your worship all health & prosperity, I take my leave.  From my Lodging in the Office of Arms, Thursday the 2d of April Anno Dni. 1612.
    Your Worships bounden to be commanded
        NICH. CHARLES, Lancaster.

The Covenanters to the King. Proposals for Peace. 
unknown
1639.
background: A short passage from Hume shall form the Introduction to this Letter. “The Scottish army was a numerous as that of the King, but inferior in cavalry.  The officers had more reputation and experience; and the soldiers, though undisciplined and ill-armed, were animated as well by the national aversion to England and the dread of becoming a province to their old enemy, as by an unsurmountable fervor of religion.  The Pulpits had extremely assisted the officers in levying recruits, and had thundered out anathemas against all those who went not out to assist the Lord against the mighty.  Yet so prudent were the leaders of the malcontents, that they immediately sent submissive Messages to the King, and craved to be admitted to a Treaty.”  One of these Messages is now before the Reader, with the Answer which was sent in return.
  To the Kings most excellent Majesty the Supplication of his Majesties Subjects of Scotland, humbly showing, 
  That where the former means used by us have not been effectual, for recovering your Majesties favor and the Peace of this your Majesties native kingdom, we fall down yet again at your Majesties feet, most humble supplicating that your Majesty would be graciously pleased to appoint some few of the many worthy Men of your Majesties Kingdom of England who are well affected to the true religion and to our common peace, to hear, by some of us of the same disposition, our humble desires, and to make known to us your Majesties gracious pleasure; that as by the Providence of God we are joined in on land under one King, so by your Majesties great wisdom and tender care all mistakings may be speedily removed, and the Two Kingdoms may be kept in peace and happiness under your Majesties long and prosperous reign; for which we shall never cease to pray, as becomes your Majesties most faithful Subjects.
  [The Answer]
  At His Majesties Camp, the eighth of June 1639.
  His Majesty having understood of the obedience of the Petitioners in reading his Proclamation as was commanded them, is graciously pleased so far to condescend unto their Petition, as to admit some of them to repair to his Majesties Camp upon Monday next, at eight of the Clock in the morning, at the Lord Generals tent; where they shall find Six persons of honor and trust appointed by his Majesty to hear their humble desires.
                  JOHN COKE.

Oliver Cromwell to Col. Hacker.  He that prays and preaches best will fight best.
Dec. 25, 1650.
  Sir,
  I have the best consideration I can for the present in this business, and although I believe Captain Hubbert is a worthy man, and here so much, yet as the case stands, I cannot with satisfaction to my self and some others revoke the Commission I had given to Captain Empson, without offence to them, and reflection upon my own judgment.  I pray let Captain Hubbert know I shall not be unmindful of him, and that no disrespect is intended to him.  But indeed I was not satisfied with your last speech to me about Empson, that he was a better preacher than a fighter or soldier or words to that effect.  Truly I think He that prays and preaches best will fight best.  I know nothing will give like courage and confidence as the knowledge of God in Christ will, and I bless God to see any in this Army able and willing to impart the knowledge they have for the good of others.  And I expect it be encouraged by all Chief Officers in this Army especially: and I hope you will do so.  I pray receive Captain Empson lovingly.  I dare assure you he is a good man and a good officer.  I would we had no worse.  I rest
  Your loving friend,
  O. CROMWELL.
   For Col. Francis Hacket at Pebles or elsewhere.
      Thiese.

Congratulation from “some that feared the Lord” in Herefordshire to Cromwell, upon his dissolution of the Long Parliament.
Herefordshire
May 7th, 1653.
background: Congratulatory Addresses came into fashion in the time of Cromwell.  The Art of framing them, as the present specimen will show, arrived very early at its maturity.
  The humble and thankful Congratulation of some that fear the Lord in the County of Hereford (who are the smallest and unworthiest in the Nation).
  After so many throes and pangs (several contests between the Powers of the World and the Interest of Christ) we conceive the great and long desired Reformation is near the Birth.  We bless the God of Heaven, who has called you forth and led you on, not only in the high places of the field, making you a terror to the Enemy; but also (among those mighty ones whom God had left) to the dissolving of the late Parliament.
  O, my Lord, what are you, that you should be the Instrument to translate the Nation from Oppression to Liberty, from the hands of corrupt Persons to the Saints? and who are we? that we should live to see these days, which our father’s longed to see, and reap the harvest of their hopes?  To be low in our own eyes when God raises us is a true testimony of humility and uprightness.  No action of service or honor ever swelled the heart of Christ; him, we believe, You make your Patterns.
  Let the high praises of God be in our mouths, and the Generations to come tell of his wonders.  Let the improvement of this opportunity be your Care and our Prayer, that you may follow the Lamb where so ever he goes, and we attend you with our persons, petitions, purses, lives, and all that is dear to us, and remain
    Your faithful and humble servants,
      signed by us in the name of many more;
    BEN E. MASON,     WROTH ROGERS,
    JOHN HERRING,     JO. CHOLMELEY,
    RICHARD NICHOLETTS,   MORGAN WATKINS,
    THO. SEABORNE,      RICH. WALSHAM,
    ROBERT WEAVER     JO. WOODDYATT,
    RICH. DELAMAIN,     JOHN GARNONS,
            WALTER MEIRICKE.
  Herefore May 7th, 1653.

From James Smith in Woolwich, to the overseer of Aveley
September 5, 1831
  Sir
  I have taken the Liberty of Writing to you to inform you that my Wife’s Friends have got me a good Situation in Canterbury as horse keeper providing I can get to go I have had only one weeks work since I was in Essex is it here as it is every where they wont employ any one but there one I am very sorry to trouble the Gentlemen but I hope they will take it in to consideration and send me a trifle to help to take my family down as I can’t do here and I can’t go without some assistance for I have been obliged to make away with many of my things to help to keep my children I would not trouble you if it was not force <i>f I can’t get to go I shall be obliged to bring my family home this quarter for I can’t do any longer it is a thing I don’t like to trouble the parish that I am obliged at present I am sure there is not many would gone through as much as I have done to keep from a parish but if the gentlemen will help me down I am in hopes that won’t be any more trouble to them for years if I do go I must be in Canterbury a Saturday the 10 of September for the other man leaves on Friday night and I should like to embrace the opportunity for I may not have another chance again and my friends as taken a deal of trouble in getting the place for me I hoe the Sir you will do what you can for me for it takes a deal to support 5 children I can say for this 16 weeks I have I have no more to say not had 3 weeks work and there is no places here
        direct for Jame Smith
        Mr. Evans Buildings Red
        Lion Street Woolwich
                  Kent
footnote: ESSEX PAUPER LETTERS 1731-1837

From James Smith in Woolwich to Mr. Sewell in Aveley
Kent
February 8, 1832
  Sir I have rote these few lines to you to inform you of our distress in our family.  My husband has been sick a long while and not able to work for his family and we are very bad off I expect to be confined before long and I am quite unprepared for it for I have not things necessary for my use for I have not been able to get them I have put it very weak thinking that my husband would be able to get work that I might be able to get a few things for my use we have been obliged to make away with every article that would fetch a shilling for to get bread for the children for we have been very bad of this winter I should have come over and stated the case to the gentlemen but I have not got shoes that will bring me so far and my husband is not able to come we have had a deal of sickness this winter we have done as long as we possible can without troubling the Parish we have a large family to keep we have had a deal of sickness lately and I have one that very ill can’t run alone we have 5 children and buried 3 in woolwich without any one’s help we have no one to give us a penny and I hope that the Almighty will soften the gentlemen’s hearts towards us that they will send us a trifle as soon as they can for we are greatly in need of it at present for to get common necessaries for our use that I can’t do without we have children that has not a bit of shoes to their feet at all we would not trouble you if we was not forced to do it I hope the gentlemen will send us a trifle as it is not often that we do trouble them I would not know only for the situation that I am in and not things for my use but if the gentlemen will not send us any thing I must come home and remain there until I am confined my husband would have come with his family before but we are so much in dept that we can’t get away from this I hope gentlemen that you will send us a little to help us through our trouble and to get us a few things that can’t be without and I hope you will send as soon as possible please God we will not trouble again for one while for the summer is coming and I shall be able to work often that get over my trouble I am not afraid of work to help keep my family
  Your Humble Servant
  James Smith 
  direct for James Smith
  Mr. Evans Buildings Red
  Lion Street Woolwich

From James Smith in Woolwich, to the overseers of Aveley
Kent
September 6, 1832
Gentlemen
  I must be so troublesome to the Parish for a little assistance for I have been laid up this 5 weeks very bad and I have one boy that is very ill at present and my wife is in a poor state of health and has been since she was confined I have 6 children and not one of them able to earn a penny and that makes it very hard for us My wife earns a little at her needle when she is able it is very little that I can earn for I am not fit for hard work now I have had so much sickness and if I trouble this Parish they will send my family home because there is so much sickness in Woolwich now I am very bad of for I have been obliged to make away with all I have to support my family I will take it as a great favor if the gentlemen will assist me a little for I can’t do any longer without some little to help me and if the gentlemen will not do any thing for me I must trouble this Parish and come home I don’t want to be so troublesome but I have done as long as I can do if I come home I can’t do field work and there is nothing else to do and here I am so much known that I can sometimes get a job in the stables when I am able to do it I can’t well leave woolwich for I am so much in debt I hope the gentlemen will do a little for me as soon as they can for I am in great distress the children are very bad off for clothing and shoes and that is very bad to go without shoes I hope you will write by return post
    so no more Your Humble
    Servant James Smith
    direct for James Smith
    Mr. Evans Buildings
    Red Lion Street
    Woolwich Kent

From James Smith in Woolwich to the overseers of Aveley
Kent
25 September 1832
  Sir I am very sorry that the gentlemen would not send me a trifle to assist me and my family as I am in great need of it for I have 6 months rent to make up by the 29 ofand thats is on Saturday next at 2 shillings per week and if I can’t pay it I shall lose what few things I have and what little I have got and then I am sure I can’t get any more I am sorry to trouble you but I can’t do without I do make all the shift I can before I do trouble you I wish I could do without it I should be very glad but my family is so large and so much sickness that I can’t avoid it but I hope that the gentlemen will do a little for me and I won’t trouble them all the winter no more
                so no more
                Your humble servant
                James Smith

From James Smith in Woolwich [Kent] to Mr. Sewell in Aveley, 21 March 1833
unknown
March 21 1833
  Gentlemen
  I am sorry to be so troublesome but I cannot avoid it for I have been laid up with the rhumatic gout and not been able to do anything for this 3 months  My pension is not much to keep 6 children and our two selves I have been obliged to draw my money weekly to keep us and that is very little I am not able to work in the winter but in the summer I can do without troubling the Parish I do as long as I can before I do I pay 2 shillings per week for one room and that I have to pay a quarters rent on the 29 of this month and I have not got it to pay if the gentlemen will be so kind as to send me a trifle to help me to pay it or else I shall have what few things taken away from us and then I am sure I can never get any more and then I must come home but don’t want to come for I know the workhouse will be my portion for I am not able to work in the fields and in the summer I got about for one and the others as I am so much known I hope Sir you will assist me this time as I will give you my word that I won’t trouble you any more until next Christmas as the Summer is coming I can do but in the winter I cannot with my family for I leave not one to bring in any thing My wife is laid up with bad eyes and often is and can get no care for them I should not trouble if I could do with I have been obliged to make away with last thing that will fetch a shilling for bread for the children if the gentlemen will not be leave me I can show the doublicates my wife would come and state the case to you but her eyes is bad and we have not got the money to come with I hope you will do what you can for me and if the gentlemen will not assist me in paying of my rent I hope you will let me know and I must sell what few things I have to pay the rent and come home at you must consider that my pension is not much to keep 3 of us and when I am laid up I want nourishment but I can’t have it I hope you will let me know as soon as you can for the time is short James Smith
  Mr. Evans Building
  Red Lion Street
  Woolwich
  I received the last and much obliged to you for your kindness

AN IRISH CORPUS ASTRONOMIAE
unknown
unknown
INTRODUCTION
  It would, perhaps, be unjust to class the Corpus Astronomiae among the livres populaires of which M. Nisard has made so laborious a study.  It is true that it bears much resemblance in detail to publications like the Almanach liégeois and the Calendrier et Connpost des Bergers, which made it their business to supply to half-educated or rural audiences an abstract of what passed for useful and reliable information upon subjects connected with the calendar, agriculture or medicine.  But the aim of the compiler of the Corpus was higher and his execution less superficial.  He seems to have made a serious attempt to compose a manual which might serve to provide readers unable or unwilling to master larger treatises with an abridgment of the main facts or theories recognized as of traditional importance in physical, astronomical and agricultural science.  The work, slight as it is, serves at any rate to emphasize the lasting vitality of much of the learning of the ancient world, which, transmitted to the Middle Ages in the works of teachers and compilers, was renewed by contact with Arabian science, and formed the basis of general knowledge for succeeding generations.  The author reproduces with but slight variation the definitions which, given in the scientific schools of Athens and Alexandria, were popularized by the Stoics, reproduced from Isidore to Bede and from Bede to Rabanus Maurus, till they passed into the common stock of European knowledge; his system of chronology is the chronology of Eusebius, who built upon the foundations of Greek science; his astronomy, more than a century after the death of Copernicus, is the Ptolemaic system, itself a reaction against the more enlightened views of advanced astronomers, such as Aristarchus of Samos; for his agriculture he relies not upon contemporaries but upon Pliny and Palladius and “Abencenif”; and medicine is complicated still by the considerations which weighed with the practitioners of the Roman Empire.
  Our author begins with chronology, passes on to physics and agriculture, devotes the bulk of his book to astrology and ends with a perfunctory treatment of the application of astrology to medical theory and practice:  it will be most convenient to follow this order in giving a short sketch of the progress of those branches of science before his time, and the conditions under which the work was written and translated.
  The daily life of the farmer and the sailor had from the earliest times necessitated some elementary knowledge of astronomy so far as concerned the points of the compass, the revolution of the seasons and the phases of the moon:  the necessities of civil government and historical records of even a meagre kind demanded greater precision in chronological calculations, which the rise of scientific curiosity with regard to the movements of the sun, moon and planets, and the revolution of the stars, afforded the means of fixing.  The labors of astronomers and mathematicians in Babylon, Egypt and Greece had brought these calculations to a reasonable degree of precision by the first century B.C.:  the length of the solar year had been approximately determined; the division of time into months according to the phases of the moon had been accommodated to the more accurate division based upon the path of the sun among the signs of the zodiac; and some attempt had been made to harmonize the various methods of reckoning time which were in vogue in different countries and apply the results of these researches to the formation of canons of historical chronology.  These studies were pursued by the mathematicians and astronomers of Alexandria with marked success under the enlightened patronage of the Ptolemies:  Julius Caesar made use of their labors in the reformation of the Roman Calendar which, under the combined influences of ignorance and sacerdotal fraud, had fallen into a state of portentous confusion.  When he employed the Alexandrian astronomer Sosigenes upon the task it was found impossible to bring the civil into conformity with the astronomical reckoning by any means less drastic than the addition of 67 days to the current year.  The reforms of Sosigenes adopted on the 1st of January 45 B.C. remained in use until Pope Gregory XIII., employing the more accurate calculations then possible, introduced in 1582 the calendar still in use.
  The application of more accurate chronological researches to the science of history was introduced to the Roman world by a contemporary of Caesar, M. Terentius Varro, who did little more than adopt the fruit of the labors of Alexandrian scholars.  His accurate and laborious application of scientific methods of research to the history of Rome and of Latin Literature marks an epoch in chronological studies; his results (though his historical and chronological treatises exist only in fragments) were adopted by succeeding writers who did not always acknowledge the debt with the frankness with which S. Augustine confesses to a similar obligation in the sphere of Roman religion.  His works form a principal source in such matters for writers like the Elder Pliny and Isidore of Seville who thus transferred to mediaeval Europe some fragments of ancient erudition.
  But the interest taken in chronological study in Christian circles from the second century onwards was not the disinterested scientific interest of an Eratosthenes or a Varro.  The pursuit of knowledge for its own sake, still more the desire to enlarge its boundaries, became more and more rare.  But a knowledge of chronology was urgently demanded for the purposes of ecclesiastical discipline and of controversial defense.
  The calculation of the date of Easter required at least some acquaintance with astronomical theory.  The controversy which grew up around this question led to many systems of calculation more or less adapted to preserve the apostolic tradition.  The Greek and Roman Churches found themselves unable to agree:  within the Roman Church itself various systems were successively in vogue; and one great point of controversy between the Church on the Continent of Europe and the Churches of Britain and Ireland turned upon the obstinate maintenance by the Celtic Christians of a method of calculating the date of the festival long abandoned as unsatisfactory by the official voice of the Roman Church.
  This isolated point of chronological study was, however, a mere matter of accurate calculation and was settled by the end of the seventh century throughout the West.  But the purposes of controversy gave rise to a system of historical chronology which imposed itself upon the intellect of Europe almost till our own day.  The Church found itself confronted by a civilization resting upon an historical tradition impossible to reconcile with the data of its own documents.  The Egyptians and Chaldaeans claimed an antiquity which made the Garden of Eden seem a comparatively modern enclosure.  Controversialists, like Porphyry, attacked the historical credibility of the Jewish records; and the moral and religious truths which even rival controversialists had to admit in the documents appealed to by their opponents were freely asserted by both sides to have been shamelessly borrowed by the opposite side from teachings of superior antiquity.  It became necessary, therefore, for Christian controversialists to fix some system of chronology by which the sceptical assertions of their opponents might be confuted.  The work was undertaken first by Julius Africanus, whose system is only the first of a long series of which that of Eusebius, adopted by Jerome, is the chief.  He drew out the chronology of the globe from the day of the creation until his own time:  upon the basis of the Old Testament he fixed the duration and the chronological details of the successive epochs from the appearance of Adam till the birth of Christ; he synchronized with this the history of the nations of antiquity, dealing firmly with traditions which demanded larger space than could be granted by his framework.  Chronologers like Varro and his Roman followers were caught in their own trap.  With a scientific candor which proved a fatal defeat to the controversial use of his results, Varro had admitted a mythical period about which nothing whatever was known, extending from the creation to the flood of Deucalion and a second period, largely filled with the fond inventions of poets and mythographers, which extended from the flood to the first Olympiad.  But in the Chronicle of Eusebius the period before the flood presented a foothold for the chronologer as firm as any period of a later date, while the somewhat dubious sanctity attaching to the date of the first Olympiad was as nothing to the certainty with which every date in Jewish history might be determined.
  With some variations in detail, but with no uncertainty as to the method to be pursued in determining the facts, the system of Eusebius and Jerome was accepted as the orthodox view.  It passed into the encyclopedias of learning and into the minor manuals of the Middle Ages.  It survived the Renaissance.  Scholars like Scaliger or Petavius or Spanheim or Ussher might enlarge the learned apparatus by which the results were confirmed or rectified.  Controversy might rage about points of detail and the period before the birth of Christ might be enlarged or diminished, as the result of some epoch making researches, by periods of a few hundred years.  But the methods of enquiry, and the data appealed to, remained unaltered, and successive writers merely reproduced an accepted doctrine which it would be heresy to endeavor to confute.  Once at least the broad and confident stream of these speculations was ruffled by the bold plunge of a recklass investigator.  Isaac de la Peyrere, engaged in an assault upon the fortress of the doctrine of Original Sin, invented in a commentary upon some verses of S. Paul’s Epistle to the Romans the theory of a race of men anterior to Adam.  So startling an hypothesis required support of no usual kind, and its author appealed with an almost pathetic confidence to the historical records of Egypt and Chaldea and the vast length of time required for the slow advance of the sciences of astronomy and astrology.  He labored in a learned treatise to gain for his arguments at least an unbiased hearing.  His book was burnt, and the author made his peace with orthodoxy by bidding a long farewell to chronology.
  If the chronology is traditional, so is the physical science and the astronomy of our treatise.  The doctrine of the four elements has had a long history.  Invented by Empedocles of Agrigentum, it found favor with Aristotle, and was incorporated into his system of physics, certain concessions and adaptations being made to disarm criticism; thus Aristotle added the theory of the quinta essentia of which the heavens were composed and admitted that the elements might be interchangeable.  The rival system was that of Leucippus and Democritus who invented the atomic theory, seized upon by Epicurus and his school as forming a sufficiently strong scientific basis (if not too rigidly handled) for their practical atheism and their hedonistic ethics.  The Stoics had adopted as the basis of their physics the theory of Empedocles and Aristotle, though upon the addition of the quinta essentia they seem to have preferred to suspend judgment; upon their physical theories the Stoics founded their theology, which they regarded as a branch of the wider subject of physics; and their ethics were in intimate dependence upon both.  Their great teacher Poseidonios, a man of wide interests and encyclopedic learning, gave to Stoicism during the first century B.C. the form in which in appealed with such striking success to the Graeco-Roman world.  Fusing with the Stoic theology enough of the mysticism of the East to appeal to religious feelings hardly to be satisfied by the emotional applications of physics, enough of the mysticism of the East to appeal to religious feelings hardly to be satisfied by the emotional applications of physics, enough of common sense and knowledge of the world to make the Stoic ethics palatable to ordinary men and women, he gave to Stoicism an influence and an impetus which carried it through many generations as a practical guide for life.  Its ethics took an extraordinary hold of the serious classes in the Roman Empire; and the undoubted superiority of its moral creed lent a fictitious importance to the system of physics with which it was associated.  The atomic theory of the Epicureans passed into disrepute not because its upholders were bereft of arguments but because they were believed to be bereft of morals.  The views of Seneca upon ethics were the best guarantee of the soundness of his views upon physics.  The doctrine of the four elements not merely carried the day but by forming an integral part of a philosophy which seemed to have more affinity with Christianity upon the moral side than any other crushed out rival theories by engaging the support of theology.
  The influence of the physics of the Stoic school in Christian circles is perhaps nowhere shown in a more-striking light than in S. Basil’s Hexaemeron, a homiletic commentary upon the Mosiac record of the six days of Creation.  Where questions of physics are concerned S. Basil accepts without hesitation the views of his Stoic teachers:  he blends the views of Poseidonios with the testimony of Moses, and many of the homilies of which the treatise is composed read as if they had been written by Seneca and translated into Greek with the necessary additions and alterations by some Christian controversialist.  His work was introduced to the West by S. Ambrose whose Hexaemeron is virtually a translation of the work of S. Basil; and, as purely scientific interests and studies declined, succeeding writers were content to take over the speculations or the assertions of predecessors of approved orthodoxy and pass them on in manuals or encyclopedias to mediaeval Europe.
  As with physics, so with astronomy.  The extent of the progress made by scientific astronomers in the Greek world is often very imperfectly understood:  Anaxagoras and the Pythagoreans had discovered the true explanation of solar and lunar eclipses; Hipparchus discovered the precession of the equinoxes; to Heracleides of Pontos is ascribed with great probability the discovery that the planets Venus and Mercury circle round the sun; Aristarchus of Samos held not merely that the earth turns upon its axis but has a yearly revolution round the sun.  The fact that none of these discoveries was fully followed out and some of them forgotten is due no doubt to various causes, but chiefly to the gradual triumph of a point of view from which scientific truth seemed unimportant and the interests of edification and system all in all.  The importance of the geocentric hypothesis lay in its ethical and spiritual implications.  To the philosopher and the theologian alike the importance of ethical and spiritual considerations was a weighty count against any system of physics or astronomy with which these interests seemed to require any special or delicate adjustment.  Much of this bias was unconscious; the “undesigned coincidences” between a system of nature in which earth formed the centre, round which the circle of the heavens revolved, charming man’s eye by its beauty and leading his thoughts by its unerring and perpetual procession to search for the Great Cause which first conceived and unfolded so awful and magnificent a spectacle, and a system of philosophy or theology in which the soul of man was the prime interest and care of the Divine Being were too striking to be lost sight of and too specious and full of edification to be left neglected.  Here again the impetus to facile systematization seems to have come from Stoicism, and in the first place from the encyclopedic intellect of Poseidonios, eager to enrich Stocicism and fit it to conquer the world by rounding off all knowledge into a receptacle for its creed.  The gradual fusing of all science into a consistent system, far from possible after the lapse of so many more centuries, was undertaken light-heartedly.  Enquiry seemed to pause and retire, losing sight of its task in the seductions of arranging an exhibition of its past theories and achievements.
  Thus a theory of the world was built up from traditional hypotheses and solidified into an accredited system.  The earth occupied the centre of the universe; composed of the four elements earth, water, air and fire, vehicle of the four qualities, the dry, the moist, the cold and the hot, lying between the four points of the compass, refreshed by the four winds of heaven, enjoying the alternations of the four seasons, inhabited by a race of beings whose physical health depended upon the due admixture of the four humors, and whose moral health demanded the practice of the four cardinal virtues—what could be more symmetrical, more satisfactory or more convincingly expounded?  This earth was surrounded by a series of eight concentric spheres carrying the seven planets (the Moon, Venus, Mercury, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn), and the fixed stars; beyond was the crystalline sphere whose majestic motion, carried downwards, set all the other spheres in motion at their respective velocities.  Above and beyond this outer sphere there came in time to be placed the empyrean or the “third heaven” the abode of God Himself.
  Accepted because it was authoritative, because it was plausible and because it was convenient, this theory of the physical universe incorporated and became incorporated with the most diverse philosophical and religious systems.  Pagans like Macrobius could expound it with religious fervor, and find in the music of the spheres the physical counterpart of its intellectual harmony; Pythagorean and oriental mystics almost seemed to need no other proof of its adequacy than the satisfactory position which was assigned to the numbers four and seven in the scheme; the astronomer found in it at once a tenable explanation of the phenomena which it was his business to expound and a sufficient field for the exercise of his unprogressive ingenuity; the theologian, who was not concerned with physical science as such, found it answer sufficiently to his purpose and long familiarity with its tenets and their homiletic convenience led him to view with suspicion and aversion any attempt to improve upon its teachings.  It found its way into the accepted encyclopedias in which the outlines of all knowledge were contained in a form suited for an ever declining taste and capacity for physical speculation.  Its imposing fabric supported upon all hands and serving all interests impartially received fresh confirmation by the renewed acquaintance with Aristotle through Arabian and Jewish sources which marked the rise of Mediaeval Scholasticism and it was only broken up as one of the last intellectual results of the Renaissance.
  But within its authoritative framework alterations and adaptations might be made.  In astronomy more and more accurate calculations were due to the labors of Arabian astronomers and their European followers.  The compilation of the Alphonsine Tables which served as an authoritative text book of astronomy for many generations marks a distinct advance in many respects upon previous manuals.  An additional sphere might be timidly added and almost silently withdrawn from the celestial harmony by an intrepid speculator; but such minor alterations left the main structure undisturbed.  It was in the gradual and irresistible growth of astrological speculation that the most striking alteration was made.  The belief in the power of celestial influences upon sublunar affairs was ingrained in most of the religions of the ancient world.  The Greeks adopted it from oriental sources and applied to its exposition the resources of their ingenious intellect.  The belief in the powers of the moon and planets over human life and destiny formed a bond of union between all the later forms of heathen philosophy and religion and hung like a dark cloud over the life and thought of the later Roman Empire.  The authoritative text book was the Tetrabiblos ascribed to the astronomer Ptolemy: the science was made the subject of a tedious and obscure poem by Manilius early in the first century; and in the fifth the laborious compilation of Firmicus Maternus supplied the Roman world with an authoritative text book of astrology in all its ramifications.  The Egyptian tradition was popularized, if not understood, in the work attributed to Nechepso and Petosiris and in the farrago of Vettius Valens.  The extent to which it spread its unwholesome influence is shown by the number of astrological manuscripts still extant, though still unpublished, in the greater libraries of Europe.
  Frowned upon alike by the civil and ecclesiastical authorities as a fit nursery for the production of unauthorized influence in the present and illicit speculation about the future it continued to flourish in obscurity or push itself into a partially tolerated prominence.  The truth is that it was too much akin to the authoritative physical science and astronomy to be wholly banished.  To cast the horoscope of the Emperor was a capital offence, but private horoscopes were less criminal and it seemed an innocent employment of astronomical science to trace the moderating influence of the planets or signs upon the physical formation or mental and moral characteristics of individuals, or their share in producing a fruitful or a barren season.  The science sometimes proved a useful ally to the civil power.  In the seventh century Stephen of Alexandria cast under Imperial sanction the horoscope of Mohammedanism and predicted its approaching downfall before the arms of the Eastern Empire.  The growing influence of Arabian speculation in Europe lent a powerful support to a system of speculation already too firmly rooted to be capable of expulsion.  theologians made terms with it and admitted in guarded but explicit language the possibility of astral influences upon character, subject to the supreme influences of grace and free will.  An eclipse or a comet which astrologers declared to portend an outburst of the malign activities of Mars or Saturn was admitted by the divines to be a warning, not a cause, of impending disaster, capable of being averted by repentance and reformation.
  In the sphere of medical theory and practice its influence grew to stupendous proportions.  The Greek physicians of the scientific school of Hippocrates and Galen had left a loophole for its admission here and there.  The science which claimed to predict the duration of a life and the means by which it would terminate, or to fix the duration and issue of a sickness, could not remain for ever unworthy of the attention of the physician.  The Arabian medical writers laid a real stress upon the influences of the planets in forming a diagnosis and in determining the means and the time of treatment.  The harmony of the universe, the subtle links which bound together all its parts, the connection of the elements with the planets and signs on the one hand and the humors on the other, forced a study of the planetary influences upon the attention of the practitioner who desired success and reputation.  An epidemic which was attributed to the influence of Saturn could not be expected to yield to a treatment which left its origin altogether out of account.  The Crusades which planted Europe with strange and loathsome diseases brought also an increased knowledge of the mysterious science by which they might be alleviated or controlled.
  But it was the period of the Renaissance with its uncontrolled outburst of universal speculation and curiosity which saw the real triumph of astrology.  Humanists and men of letters like Marsilio Feino plunged into the astral mysteries with enthusiasm and hope.  The ridicule of more sober minds, like that of Pico della Mirandola, produced little effect.  The new key seemed like to unlock all mysteries.  Succeeding applications of the celestial science only confirmed the world in its belief in its almost universal efficacy and utility.  The Greek and Latin astrologers were studied and applied.  Melanchthon could reconcile it with his reformed religion to translate Ptolemy’s Tetrabiblos into Latin as Cardan found it not incompatible with his to cast the horoscope of the Redeemer.  The most intimate relations of domestic life were regulated by considerations of planetary conjunctions, and the world ate and drank and dressed and went on journeys with one eye fixed upon the earth and the other upon the sky.
  Medical practice, until the Hippocratic revival of the fourteenth century, was becoming more and more a matter of blind adherence to traditions imperfectly understood.  The treatment of disease had ceased to be a matter to be regulated by observation and experiment; it consisted in the interpretation and application of the standard texts, the translations of Rhazes and Avicenna and their European followers.  Anatomy was almost as little practised in the Schools of Europe as in the Schools of Arabia where even to ask whether dissection were permissible or no constituted in itself an offense against the law.  The coction and elimination and putrefaction of the humors, the ‘derivation’ and ‘revulsion’ by blood-letting, the mysteries of the opening of the veins by latitudinal or longitudinal section, and the side on which the vein was to be opened, were discussed and settled in complete indifference to any but literary and philosophical considerations.  Different methods of purging, cauterizing and bleeding, the administration of simples the identity of which was doubtful and which could hardly be procured, specifies such as “oil of scorpions” and the like, formed the stock in trade of the mediaeval physician who was not content to rely upon diet and regimen.  Prognostication by uroscopy was universally resorted to in almost every  kind of malady, and with some physicians was practically the only kind of prognostication that they knew.
  The revival of medical knowledge was scarcely begun when the renewed influence of astrology made itself felt.  Warnings against even slight surgical operations upon certain unfavorable days were known and acted upon from early times; but there is a wide interval between the precepts of Hippocrates and those of Ptolemy on this matter, and superstition grew fast.  Among the mass of rubbish which has been foisted into the works of the Venerable Bede there is a tract De minutione sanguinis siue de phlebotomia in which the days of every month in the year and every day of the moon are tabulated according to their suitability for bleeding.  But a more extended acquaintance with the genuine literature of ancient astrology increased the opportunities for its use in medicine.  The organs and parts of the body were divided among the planets and the signs of the zodiac; every hour of the day had a planetary and, consequently, medical significance; the horoscope of the day on which the patient went to bed offered several infallible means of predicting the issue of his illness, entirely independent of its nature and of the treatment to be employed:  a more profound study of nature revealed the planetary and astral affinities of every herb of the field and every drug in the pharmacopeia and brought within the purview of astrology the very metal of which a scalpel should be made.
  Such, in brief outline, were the traditions under whose influence the Corpus Astronomiae was composed.  Even a partial critic could not pretend that its author was abreast of the learning or culture of his time.  He knows nothing of the newer astronomy which was to revolutionize the whole theory of the universe, though in this respect he was no worse than many of his contemporaries.  It is curious, however, that in enumerating the spheres he reckons the extra sphere introduced by Albategni, in opposition to the majority of his contemporaries who decline to acknowledge more than ten; this may be due to the astronomical traditions of Arabian science, which still lingered in Spain and was, perhaps, to be expected from a countryman of Alfonso the Tenth.  His agricultural knowledge is derived mainly from Palladius, whose work was so popular in the Middle Ages, while his knowledge of Pliny is, no doubt, due to the increased attention paid to the Natural History since the revival of learning.  In his devotion to astrology, to which he gives his main attention, he is a true child of his age, and in his puerile remarks upon medicine he falls far below the standard of the medical knowledge available at that time to Europe.  This again may be due to his Spanish training; for while the revival of medical knowledge was a product of the intellect of Southern Europe, the Spanish physicians lingered behind and adhered in general to the precepts and practice of a less enlightened age.
  The translation of the work into Irish is a fresh example of the pathetic devotion to learning which, amid obstacles that might almost have seemed insurmountable, marked the Irish nation.  The subjects of the work appealed to an Irish priest through the force of a long tradition.   Among the earliest monuments of Irish learning is Cummian’s celebrated contribution to the literature of the paschal controversy, and at a later period Dungal the Recluse won a European reputation as an astronomer at the court of Charles the Great.  During the thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth centuries many translations into Irish (still extant though still unpublished) were made of treatises upon mathematics, astronomy, astrology and medicine; the use of the Arabic numerals seems to have been known in Ireland early in the fourteenth century.  The pseudo Aristotelian treatise Secreta Secretorum with its medical lore of the Salernitan type was translated early in the fifteenth century.  Miss Power has lately edited for the Irish Texts Society An Irish Astronomical Tract translated from a Latin version of the astronomy of Messahalah perhaps as early as the fourteenth century.
  The translation of the Corpus Astronomiae was probably  made for educational purposes, as were many of the translations referred to above.  Denied the advantage of opportunities for the higher learning at home, Irish scholars and ecclesiastics were forced to seek such opportunities upon the Continent and characteristically tried to make available for their less fortunate countrymen who remained in Ireland the savor of those fruits which they themselves had first tasted in exile.
      E.M.H.
  4. INFORMATION OF THE HUSBANDRY OF THE YEAR ACCORDING TO PLINY.
  January.
    With the crescent moon of this month husbandmen should prune early-flowering trees such as almond-trees, plum-trees and the like.  The bitter pips of oranges and lemons, and (the kernels) of bullaces and walnuts should be sown at this time in warm ground.  From full moon till new again is the best time for cutting every kind of timber so that it may be more durable; but the best trees for that purpose are the trees that have lost their foliage.  It is well here to put manure on the land and to dress it with it, and to sow garlic and onions.  Pliny says, Lib. 18, that the time to cut anything so that it may keep a long time, and also for castrating and grubbing, is after the full of each moon.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, fruits will be plentiful, woods will yield a bad return, there will be abundance of water, unwholesome winds, disturbances among peoples, and deaths of men and cattle in the land in which it is heard, according to the statements of the learned author and distinguished astronomer Leopold of Austria.  And the first thunder is the first thunder that occurs after New Year’s Day or on that very day itself.
  5. HUSBANDRY AND PROGNOSTICATION FOR THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY, ACCORDING TO PALLADIUS.
    From the new moon of this month until it is full, it is well to sow hemp and flax, mustard and melons, that they may be early.  From the full of this moon until the new moon, it is well to cut the rods for baskets and such like (but Palladius says that it is better to cut them about this time of the moon in the month of January).  The vines may be pruned.  Disease of the feet is dangerous at this time.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, it signifies the death of powerful people, diseases of the head, pain in the ears, great frost and little fruit, according to Leopold.
  6. MARCH ACCORDI NG TO PALLADIUS.
    With the crescent moon of this month melons, cucumbers, and pumpkins should be sown, and hemp and flax in warm ground:  and it is better to sow them now than in the month of February; and likewise the chick-peas and all bitter pips, and the young fig-trees in a moderately warm ground.  With the full of this moon it is well to weed the gardens and the wheat, and to plough the fields so that the weeds may not grow, and to clean beneath the trees which bud late, viz., the mulberry-tree and the pomegranate, &c.  The pruning of the vines should not be put off from this time, because just now they are beginning to bud.  Evil humors are engendered in this month, and diseases of the head are dangerous.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, it denotes great winds, plenty of grain and grass, dissensions, terrors and death in the land in which it is heard, according to Leopold.
  7. THE WORKS OF APRIL ACCORDING TO ABENCENIF.
    From the crescent moon of this month until full moon it is well to plant all kitchen-gardens, though it is a good plan likewise to do so in any month from January to August.  From the full of this moon until new moon again, it is well to irrigate the tilled fields which are dry and hot.  This is a good month for ridding the bee-hives of spiders and grubs which are produced in them.  This time is very wholesome for taking a purge, and diseases in the neck and throat are dangerous.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, it denotes that the year will be very fruitful; plenty of wine and wheat and cattle, especially of wheat in dry stony grounds; but it likewise denotes perils on the sea in the kingdoms in which it is heard, according to Leopold.
  8. THE HUSBANDRY OF MAY ACCORDING TO PALLADIUS.
    From new moon until full moon, it is well to clip the saffron (-beds), and to admit the he-goats to the goats.  About this time all sorts of pot-herbs may be planted.  From full moon until new moon is better than any other time for burning and baking bricks, and for all kinds of earthenware work, for this is the best time in the year for that purpose.  At this time it is well to plough the fields which are sown in Autumn, and in cold ground.  Calves, boars and male lambs may be castrated.  Any disease in the shoulders and in the hands is more dangerous than at any other time, and especially a wound from iron.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, i.e., from the beginning of the year, it denotes abundance of water, injury to the birds, plenty of bread and all sorts of legumes in the kingdoms in which it is heard, according to Leopold.
  9. THE WORKS OF THE MONTH OF JUNE ACCORDING TO PALLADIUS.
    From new moon until full moon it is well to prune the trees which have a sappy bark—viz., orange trees, fig-trees, and olive-trees, and other such trees; also to plant cabbage and all other pot-herbs so that they may be early.  From full moon until new moon it is well to cut and thresh beans and every other sort of legume if they are dry.  Palladius says that if the fig-trees are irrigated at this time they will ripen the earlier, and as a result they will be better and more tasty.  The wool which is shorn from the sheep at this time is better than at any other time, because it is more sudoriferous.  In this month diseases of the chest and stomach and lungs are dangerous.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, it denotes plenty of bread and fish, loss of fruits, unrest among the peoples, and inundations of rivers in the land in which it is heard, according to Leopold.
  10. THE WORKS OF JULY ACCORDING TO PALLADIUS.
    From the new of this moon until it is full, it is usual to plant curly cabbage, turnips, onions, carrots and mustard; and to cut the brambles from the ground so that they may not grow.  From the full of this moon until new moon, it is profitable to reap the wheat, so that it may be good and last loner.  Disease of the heart is injurious in this month.  Further, purgings, blood-letting, swimming, bathing and mid-day sleep are injurious in this month.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, it denotes great trouble in the kingdoms, troublous commotion in the towns, scarcity of bread, but plentiful fruit, in the land in which it is heard, as Leopold says.
  11. THE WORKD OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST ACCORDING TO PALLADIUS.
    From the new of this moon until full moon, it is well to put the manure on the fields for the wheat, to dig the onions for storing; and, after rain, to sow the radishes, the turnips and the late cabbage.  From the full of this moon until new moon, it is usual to dry grapes, prunes and figs, so that use may be made of them at some other time; and to sow the seed of cabbages and beans.  In this month the company of women, midday sleep and the bath are very dangerous; and purging is not good, nor blood-letting, except in a case of urgent necessity.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, it denotes death to the fishes of the sea and to four-footed animals, quietude for the peoples, and many diseases in the kingdoms in which it is heard, according to Leopold of Austria.
  12. THE WORKS OF SEPTEMBER ACCORDING TO PALLADIUS.
    From the new of this moon until full moon, it is well to sow the rye, the barley and the beans in a warm ground; for it is in cold ground that it is best to sow them before this.  This is a very good time for sowing flax.  From the full of this moon until new moon is the natural time for gathering the grapes and making wine.  It is well to plough and dig the ground now, and to dress it with manure, in order to sow all kinds of garden herbs in it.  throughout this month the blood is in good condition for letting, and every disease in the kidneys and the hips is very dangerous.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, it denotes drought at the beginning of the year, and moisture at its end; abundance of bread, but dear; and much menace of death to the populace in the land in which it is heard, according to Leopold.
  13. THE WORKS OF OCTOBER ACCORDING TO ABENCENIF.
    From the beginning of this month until the end, in a late soil, it is proper to make oil and wine, and it is well to sow now all kinds of grain, such as wheat, rye, barley, and such like.  Filberts, chestnuts, pomegranates and walnuts should be gathered, and the late fruit likewise:  and cherry, pear and apple trees should be planted.  All wounds are difficult to heal in this month, and disease of the private parts is dangerous.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, it denotes storms of wind and commotion of the airs, scarcity of bread and fruit and wine, death of cattle and fish in the land in which it is heard, according to Leopold.
  14. THE WORKS OF NOVEMBER ACCORDING TO ABENCENIF.
    From the beginning of this month it is well to plough the fields, and the ground in which weeds are, so that they may not grow; and to cut the decayed wood from the trees, and dress them with manure.  At the full of this moon, and at the full of the moon after it, it is well to salt meat, and to cut timber for work.  This is a good month for blood letting, and for bathing, and for healing every kind of disease.  And diseases in the legs are dangerous.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, it denotes damage to the sheep, abundance of wheat, joyousness in the people.  The weather will come in well.  It will not rain except a very profitable amount; nevertheless, the fruit will fall from the trees sooner than is right in the land in which it is heard, according to Leopold.
  15. THE WORKS OF DECEMBER ACCORDING TO PALLADIUS.
    Although there is little field work in this month, still it is possible to sow garden herbs for the spring, and the timber which is cut at this time is very durable, and the zealous and careful husbandman will not lack something to do, even at this time (as Palladius says), namely, to collect the manure in heaps, to make ropes and cords for the time to come, to clean the cellars, and to do every other work which belongs to the character of the season.  There are many other things which might be said about each month which we have not said because we do not wish to be prolix.  It is now that disease of the knees is dangerous.  If it is now that the first thunder is heard, it denotes a good year, wholesomeness, and peace among the tribes in the land in which it is heard, according to Leopold of Austria.
  THE FOURTH CHAPTER
  1. CONCERNING THE PROGNOSTICATION OF THE SEASON.  CONCERNING THE PLANETS AND THEIR PROPERTIES ACCORDING TO LEOPOLD.
    Before we commence with the prognostication of the year, it is not amiss to explain to proverb which is frequently quoted by the learned, and even by Christian astrologers, because it bears upon this work:  viz., Astra movent homines, sed Deus astra movet, that is, that the stars move and incline people to a change of nature, and that they do the same with all the created things of the world, living, sensible and insensible, shedding into them their proper qualities, good or bad.  But further, the same proverb says that God moves the stars themselves, giving them by his great powers the natural virtue to influence men and every other thing according to its own proper nature; so that it is from them that the natural inclination of everything is; whence comes the old saying of Aristotle, which runs:  Quod a natura inest, semper inest; that is, what is in a man naturally is separated from him with difficulty; and not only so, but it stays with him perpetually; for we prove that constantly in our own case and in the case of all others; but further it is certain that it is possible for the wise and discreet man to gain the victory over every inclination which comes naturally.  Accordingly it has been wisely said:  Sapiens dominabitur astris, that is, that the wise man is master of the stars, for he makes his proud nature mild and gentle, and he avoids the evil to which he is prone.  Further, great almighty God, to whom we render all praise, has given to the individual the power of his free will, in such a way that not only the stars but also the demons, hell, and every other thing are not able to influence a man unless he be guilty himself in that regard, much less when he has the assistance of God’s grace.  Accordingly I say that the stars can influence man naturally, but that they cannot force him.  Of this natural inclination I wish to treat in the natural prognostication of the planets, while submitting myself and lying wholly and completely beneath the correction and the guidance of our holy mother, the Roman Catholic Church.
  2. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES OF THE PLANET WHICH IS CALLED SATURNUS.
    The place of this planet is the seventh sphere, which is called the seventh heaven, and according to natural order it is called the first planet.  Its property is to be cold and dry, melancholic, earthy, masculine and diurnal.  It is naturally an enemy to human nature.  It is the cause of much labor, famine, hardship, scarcity of the year’s fruit, and detriment to food-stuffs:  it causes likewise sorrow, sightings, destruction, poverty and death; trouble, unrest, weariness and despair.  This planet usually inclines those over whom it rules to hatred, sadness, melancholy, torment, horror, loneliness and disinclination for company.  This planet rules over the aged, the lonely, the miserly, the sad, the melancholic, the usurious, the penurious, the servile, the despondent, the incredulous, the inordinate, the gluttonous, the superstitious, and further over those who are prone to the black art, and who walk amongst the dead corpses making witchcraft and deviltry.
  3. CONCERNING THE PROGNOSTICATION OF THIS PLANET.
    The day of this planet is Saturday:  its hour is the first hour when the sun rises that day and the eighth hour after sunrise.  And in case that the year shall begin on a Saturday, it will be dry and scarce of food; the spring will be very windy, the summer wet, the autumn dry and cool, the winter wearisome, windy, somewhat cold, and scarce of water.  It denotes, further, shortage of wheat, wine, oil, and less honey.  Flax will be scarce and dear; fruit will be plentiful, but fresh fish will not be so.  It denotes likewise that there will be much mention of marriage, and that many of the old houses will fall.  Fever will be powerful, and especially the tertian and the quartan, in many places in the world.  Death is near old people in this year, for the weather is against them.  It denotes death to the cattle (especially sheep), and the silk-worms.
  4. CONCERNING THE PHYSIOGNOMY WHICH COMES FROM THIS PLANET.
    Those who are born under the dominion of this planet are naturally cold and dry, large-faced and ugly.  Their eyes are moderate in size and directed towards the ground, but they have one eye larger than the other.  Nostrils fleshy, lips thick, brows close together, the color of their face brown, their hair black, crisp, wooly and somewhat curly; some of their teeth longer than others, breast hairy, legs long and crooked.  They are sinewy and dry-fleshed, their veins narrow though prominent.  And if this planet be in the west, the people will be small, spare-fleshed, scant-bearded, and with long straight hair.
  5. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES WHICH THIS PLANET SHEDS IN MAN
    The property of those who are born under this planet is to be deeply thoughtful, timid and fond of husbandry.  They are inconstant, sad, melancholic, deceitful, tricky (and, according to the philosophers, lecherous, owing to the excess of sperm which is generated in them).  They are fond of solitude and hate rejoicing.  They are angered by a trifling cause and difficult to part from their wrath; nevertheless, the wise man can guard himself against all these evil properties through the help of God and with the gift of free will.
  6. CONCERNING THE NATURAL INCLINATION OF THESE PEOPLE.
    They are inclined to letters and to learning, and especially to philosophy and the study of the understanding.  Further, to holy secrets, of the free and unfree sciences, namely, husbandry, masonry, shoemaking and glovemaking.  Others of them are inclined to inter corpses, and to every work that is made of earth.  They are zealous in seeking mines of mercury, lead and tin, and the antique treasures of the earth.  They make good friars, for they like solitude.  This planet is ninety-five times greater than the earth (according to Alfraganus).  Its metal is lead, its color is the color of ashes.  It governs the earth and is distant from it 28,089,750 leagues, and has a body of 589,680 leagues.
  7. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES OF THE PLANET WHICH IS CALLED JUPITER.
    The place of this planet is the sixth sphere.  Its property is to be warm, moist, airy, sanguinary, masculine, and it is very favorable to human nature, because it is itself naturally moderate, and so it purifies the air; whence it comes that the winds are wholesome, and the rain very profitable to the earth.  It moderates the heat in summer and the cold in winter, lessens diseases, banishes plagues, and assists growing things.  It makes folk to be peacefully disposed toward one another, and to be devout, especially those whose planet it is, that is, wise, honest, modest, generous, just, merciful, orderly, faithful, well-inclined, truthful, magnanimous, virtuous people; people who are right-lived, compassionate, generous, charitable; people who are fond of women, jolly, amiable; people who are well-shaped, handsome, wise; people who have the fear of God in their hearts and are vigilant and watchful for Him.
  8. CONCERNING THE PROGNOSTICATION OF THIS PLANET.
    This planet’s day is Thursday.  Its hour is the first hour of sunrise on that day and the eighth hour after that.  In the year which begins on this day, i.e., on Thursday, the Spring will be windy, the Summer moderate, the Autumn wet, and the Winter likewise moderate.  Wheat and food will be plentiful.  Small grain will be very plentiful and flax very scarce.  Wine will be abundant, and oil and honey scarce, but pork and fresh fish will be plentiful.  That year will be inclined to peace, but (as we have said) free will gives victory over its nature.
  9. CONCERNING THE PHYSIOGNOMY WHICH THIS PLANET GIVES.
    People who are born under the government of this planet are well-personed, shapely, white, inclined to be fair formed; their beards brown, curly and divided into two portions; their eyes red, weaksighted, black, handsome; faces broad and fleshy; teeth large and closely set; hair soft and thin, as a result of which they become bald on the top; veins long and prominent.
  10. CONCERNING THE QUALITIES OF THESE FOLK.
    They are very peaceful, honest, guileless, without duplicity in mind.  They are temperate as regards food and drink, virtuous, faithful, well-informed; they are not hostile or vengeful, nevertheless they are easily moved to wrath at a slight cause.  They fulfill their promises faithfully.  They transact their business with discretion.  They give good and salutary advice.  They understand everything easily, because they have clear intellects; they are prolific and healthy, and of good character.
  11. CONCERNING THE NATURAL INCLINATION OF THESE FOLK.
    They are inclined for the Church, to faith and devotion, because they are peaceable, virtuous, honest: in addition, they are inclined to be judges and literary people, councilors and careful of the poor, and for every other occasion deserving of charity.  Alfraganus says that this planet is 95 times greater than the earth.  Its metal is tin.  It governs the air.  It is distant from the earth 17,208,200 leagues, and has a body of 615,600 leagues.
  12. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES OF THE PLANET WHICH IS CALLED MARS.
    The place of this planet is the fifth sphere.  Its property is to be dry, warm, choleric, fiery, masculine and nocturnal.  It is hostile to human nature owing to its own evil nature.  It causes winds, disturbances, frost and great cold, hailstones and darkness, great heat in due season, immoderate winds, unwholesome and of evil properties.  And it is so perverse and harmful by nature, and that in such a way that it moves and inclines the mind of creatures against each other, until they are angry and contentious, disputations, erratic, blood-shedding, warring and hostile towards one another.  It inclines them likewise to be thievish, predatory, incendiary, murderous, unjust, abusive and quick-tempered.  This planet governs the warlike, the angry, treacherous, faithless and lying the drunkards, gluttonous and shameless, highwaymen, quarrelsome and contentious persons, those who are fond of weapons, who are quick-tempered, madmen, plunderers and robbers; the evil-intentioned, deceitful and distressed; the tricky, backbiting and calumnious; the envious, grasping, covetous; the treacherous, bloody, irascible, boastful.
  13. CONCERNING THE PROGNOSTICATION OF THIS PLANET.
    The day of this planet is Tuesday; its hour is the first hour and the eighth hour.  In the year which begins with this day, the spring will be wet, the summer hot, the autumn dry, and the winter cold, wet and dark, with much snow.  There will be a fortune by the seaside owing to the great number of shipwrecks.  It denotes damage to wheat and other grain, a moderate amount of oil and honey.  All kinds of legumes will be plentiful, little wine, a moderate amount of fruit, and many of the small cattle will die owing to the abundance of blood, and the heat which governs them in that year.  It denotes likewise many diseases and death to the female sex, and in addition it denotes sudden death, and that powerful nobles vitam cum morte commutabunt.  There will be strife and contention between tyrants.
  14. CONCERNING THE PHYSIOGNOMY WHICH THIS PLANET GIVES.
    Folk who are born under this planet have large faces, ugly, with small reddish spots in them; hair scant, red or fair; eyes inflamed, red and fleshy, and sight acute; nostrils large and broad; teeth clean, having spaces between them, incomplete; and they are small bearded, and with bent figures.  If this planet is in the west it denotes narrow necks, and weak legs which take long strides in walking: feet high-arched; ankles small, and heads large.
  15. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES OF THESE FOLK.
    They are irascible, ready at striking one, wanting in sense and in words.  They seek contention and are enemies of quietude.  They are fond of their own sort, of playing and of women.  They are lying, deceitful, perfidious, without compassion, thievish; but the wise man gains the victory over the influence of the stars and his own nature.
  16. CONCERNING THE NATURAL INCLINATION OF THESE FOLK.
    These are inclined to arms and fire, and accordingly they are inclined to be smiths, artificers, armourers, and mechanics of all kinds; they are fond of firearms, and of the manufacture of great and small guns, &c.  This planet is, according to Alfraganus, one and a half times greater than the earth, and an eighth part more.  It governs fire.  Its metal is iron and copper, and it is distant from the earth 2,379,000 leagues, and has a body of 10,530 leagues.
  17. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES OF THE PLANET WHICH IS CALLED SOL.
    Sol.
    The place of this planet is in the midst of the other planets, and in the fourth heaven or sphere, as lord and king over them, from which they all obtain their light.  The property of this planet, which is called Sol, i.e., the sun, is to be warm and dry moderately, diurnal and masculine.  From it comes that the fruits are ripe, and every other thing fulfilled in its own time.  It is because God has given it such power to advance things that Aristotle was moved to say: Sol et homo generant hominem, that is, that man and the sun generate man.  Hali speaks of this planet, and says that it is the cause of the growth of everything, and that it is it that generates the growing things and the animals.  It influences and moves people to be in a powerful, honorable, free position; and it governs another to be dignified and aiming at high rank.  It governs kings and powerful people, people who are grave, magnanimous and of good counsel; and every man who is a counselor to kings or prince.
  18. CONCERNING THE PROGNOSTICATION OF THIS PLANET.
    The day of this planet is Sunday, and its hour the first hour and the eighth.  In the year which begins on this day, the spring will be moderate, the summer very warm, the autumn windy, and the winter sharp.  Food will be plentiful and every sort of grain, and further, wine, oil, honey and fruits.  The cattle, small and great, will be plentiful.  This planet denotes contentions between nobles, and rumor about kings, and short life for the young, sed Deus super omnia.
  19. CONCERNING THE PHYSIOGNOMY WHICH THIS PLANET GIVES.
    Those who are born under the government of this planet are fair and fleshy: with round clear faces, mouth moderate, lips somewhat thick, brows narrow, teeth white and beautiful, nose straight and shapely; neck and bosom rounded; figure straight and shapely; they are very strong and powerful.
  20. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES OF THESE FOLK.
    They are grave, honest, generous, of good counsel, anxious that another should honor them.  They are princely in mind, well spoken, haughty, and having a great opinion of themselves.
  21. CONCERNING THE NATURAL INCLINATIONS OF THESE FOLK.
    These are inclined to be in an honorable position, and in high ranks governing other people; accordingly they are ready to be presidents, governors, captains, colonels, pilots and prelates; to be pastors over men and animals, but finally, they are inclined to every office and trade connected with silk, gold and silver.  This planet is, as Alfraganus says, 166 times greater than the earth.  It has dominion over fire.  Its metal is gold.  It is distant from the earth 1,213,333 leagues, and has a body of 1,075,680 leagues.
  22. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE PLANET WHICH IS CALLED VENUS.
  Venus.
    The place of this planet is the third sphere:  its property is to be cold and moist moderately, watery, feminine, nocturnal and somewhat phlegmatic.  It is favorable to human nature.  This is the star which most illumines the night after the moon, and which is usually called the morning star.  It is sometimes seen at sunrise, especially in the winter.  It has dominion over women, children, and musicians, well spoken people, happy, fortunate, just, wise, cheerful, grateful, merciful people; and over those who like to be neatly got up and showily dressed.
  23. CONCERNING THE PROGNOSTICATION OF THIS PLANET.
    The day of this planet is Friday:  its hour is the first hour and the eighth.  The year which begins on this day will not be lacking in water.  The spring will be windy, the summer moist and gentle, the autumn dry and windy in some places and very wet in others, and the winter cold and very laborious.  Food will be plentiful but dear.  The vine will be good and fruitful, and oil and honey plentiful.  It denotes disease of the eyes, and the death of many children by smallpox, and that many of the small cattle will die, and that there will be earthquakes in many places.
  24. CONCERNING THE PHYSIOGNOMY WHICH THIS PLANET GIVES.
    Those who are born under the government of this planet have fat, round, red faces; eyes black, sparkling and merry; brows black and joined; hair smooth and long, and, in some others of them, curled, and there is usually a mark on their faces; noses curved, mouth medium, upper lip smaller than the lower lip; neck handsome but narrow; persons small and spare; legs heavy; and if this planet is in the east it makes their bodies fat, fair and of handsome stature; if it is in the west they will be small-bodied and bald-headed.
  25. CONCERNING THE NATURAL INCLINATION OF THESE FOLK.
    These are inclined for idleness, and arts which are light, curious, showy, such assigning, and harping; accordingly, they are given to poetry, the organ, choirs, painting, the making of laces and gold thread, &c., and besides they are given to Comedy, i.e., a very public art.
  26. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES OF THESE FOLK.
    These are of a warm, moist, phlegmatic nature; they are eloquent, prudent and fortunate, grateful, amiable, affectionate, just, sweet-spoken, fond of music, dancing and pastimes, idle games, fornication, self-adornment and dressing and making clothes; finally, they like to be treated well and joyously, and to have perfumed clothes, and it is seldom they give themselves to learning.  This planet is, according to Alfraganus, 37 times smaller than the earth.  Its metal is copper.  It has dominion over the private parts of men and women.  It is distant from the earth 325,656 leagues, and has a mass of its own of 175 leagues.
  27. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE PLANET WHICH IS CALLED MERCURIUS.
  Mercurius.
    The place of this planet is the second sphere.  Its property is to be masculine, diurnal and of a changeable nature; because it takes its property from the planet with which it conjoins, or to which it is nearest, in such a way that if it be near a good planet its property will be good, and if it be near a bad planet its property will be bad; for we see that daily, viz., people of that property, that they are good with the good, and bad with the bad.  This planet governs the poets, writers, lawyers, painters, mathematicians and those who discover new things, goldsmiths and silversmiths, and finally those who are eager for bargaining and buying.
  28. CONCERNING THE PROGNOSTICATION OF THIS PLANET.
    The day of this planet is Wednesday:  its hour is the first hour and the eighth.  In the year which commences on this day, the spring will be wet and not very good, the summer very hot, the autumn moderate, and the winter sharp, but it will not be very cold.  Wheat and every other grain will be moderate, the vintage will be good and the oil plentiful, but it denotes scarcity of every other sort of food, and famine in places.  In the autumn it denotes the death of some prominent person, and that pregnant women will lost their children prematurely, and some of them will have still-born children at birth; the fiery fever will be common; and headache, and there will be much talk and mention of great novelties in this year.
  29. CONCERNING THE PHYSIOGNOMY OF THESE FOLK.
    Those who are born under this planet are of handsome person, medium, spare-fleshed; faces narrow, well-proportioned, long-jawed; noses long and pointed; eyes small and not very dark; eyebrows long and extended; beard thin and dark; lips thin; hair long and curled at the end; teeth irregular, and fingers long.
  30. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES OF THESE FOLK.
    These are sharp-witted, earnest, wise; they discover new things easily; they transact their business punctually; they are fitted for every trade and art, and fond of travelling in foreign lands, &c.
  31. CONCERNING THE NATURAL INCLINATION OF THESE FOLK. 
    They are inclined to be professors, writers, painters and sculptors; some of them to be mathematicians, arithmeticians, merchants and matchmakers, &c.  This planet is (according to Alfraganus) much smaller than the moon, and the moon is much smaller than the earth, as we shall say in its own place.  Its metal is quicksilver, and it is distant from the earth 125,185 leagues, and has a mass of 1,000 miles, which is equal to 200 Italian leagues.
  32. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES OF THE PLANET WHICH IS CALLED LUNA, i.e. THE MOON.
  Luna.
    The place of this planet is the first sphere which is nearest to us; its property is to be cold, moist, watery, nocturnal, feminine.  It is said that it is the cause of all damp and moisture, and of the growth of growing things, from the superabundance of moisture of this planet which it sheds into those creatures.  Many learned authors have been wearied by the close scrutiny of the property and nature of this planet; and it is only putting sand in a withe, or pouring out the ocean by drops; for its nature is so changeable, so wonderful, and so mysterious, that it is not possible to find out all about it; nevertheless, since it is a matter in hand, we shall endeavor to exhibit a little of it generally.  In the first place it must be noted that there is a great distinction between the operation of this planet when waxing and when waning; accordingly, wise and knowing people keep sharp account of the crescent or new moon, and likewise of its full or waning, on account of many things connected with husbandry, and with bodily health; for Pliny says, Lib. 18, Cap. 32, that the time for reaping, cutting and pruning everything is the full of the moon, i.e., from full moon to new, so that they may keep better.  Accordingly, the timber which is cut at the crescent moon rots in a short time, if it is a tree which loses its foliage.  And the animals which are castrated at the crescent moon are in danger, and the cereals and fruits which are gathered at the crescent moon (according to Palladius) are not substantial or lasting or profitable, as they would be if they were gathered at the full of the moon.  Another wonderful property of the moon is to be noted likewise, and that is, if one wishes the year to be one for males, let him allow the males to approach the females at the waxing of the moon; and if eggs are put under a hen or another bird at the crescent moon the cocks will be more numerous; and if he wishes the contrary let him do these things at the full moon.  Another wonder touching the new moon, as the Italian Jacobus Palermo says, if anyone wishes to know accurately the point at which the moon comes into conjunction, let him take a silver cup and put sea brine in it, and ashes made from the olive tree, i.e., the tree from which oil is made, and let him keep a sharp lookout about the time of new moon, and at the point at which it comes the ashes will be moved on the brine so that there will be plainly a turbidity in the cup.  The same author gives a reason for that, saying that this happens because of the very close government which the moon has over silver, sea water and the olive tree beyond every other thing.  Accordingly they perceive and move at its coming, showing the nature which they have from this planet.  This planet has dominion over sailors and mariners, the phlegmatic, laze weak-hearted and sluggards.
  33. CONCERNING THE PROGNOSTICATION OF THIS PLANET.
    The day of the moon is Monday; its hour is the first hour and the eighth.  In the year which begins on this day there will be no lack of water; the spring will be cool, the summer moderate, the autumn very wet, and the winter mild.  It denotes scarcity of wheat but plenty of other grain; a moderate amount of wine and oil.  It denotes many diseases of cattle, so that the nations will wonder, and further, there will be diseases on people and schisms between the powerful.  Women will suffer much in this year from their own disease, i.e., Suffocatio matricis.  Neither honey nor silk will do well this year because many bees and silkworms will die.
  34. CONCERNING THE PHYSIOGNOMY OF THOSE WHOSE PLANET IS THE MOON.
    These are very white and phlegmatic; face broad, round, blooming; eyes medium, squinting, sleepy, and one eye larger than the other.  They usually have spots on their faces; their brows close together; noses stubby, and mouths small.
  35. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES OF THESE FOLK.
    These are inconstant, virtuous, sleepy, subject to minor ailments, harmless.  They are inclined to be mariners and travel by water; they are sluggish and unenterprising.
  36. CONCERNING THE NATURAL INCLINATION OF THESE FOLK.
    They are inclined to changeable things, because they themselves are so.  They are apt to be fishermen, tavern-keepers, and to be selling food and drink and such like.  This planet (according to Alfraganus) is 39 times smaller than the earth.  Its metal is silver.  It has dominion over the salt water of the sea, and over the olive tree.  it is distant from the earth 9,847 leagues, and has a body of its own of 166 leagues.
    In accordance with the signs and the physiognomy which the planets give to those who are born under their government it is possible for every man to know his own planet, and better if he looks at his own natural inclination; for if it be the nature of Mars which he shall perceive in himself, it is certain that that is his planet, and if it be the nature of Jupiter he shall feel in himself, that is his planet, and so on with the other planets.
  37. ANOTHER WONDER OF THE MOON TOUCHING THE FLOW AND EBB OF THE SEA.
    Among all other things which the moon causes there is one of them very wonderful—namely, the flow and ebb of the sea, which flows twice and ebbs twice in the space of 24 hours and a little more, by the motion of the moon, and by accurate computation each flow and each ebb lasts six hours and the fifth part of an hour.  This flow and ebb takes place on the whole coast of the sea which is called Mare Oceanum, and in part of the sea (called) Mediterraneum, so that sometimes much land is exposed.  Accordingly it is necessary for mariners to know these, and when they commence, so that they may come safe to land through the strait narrow ways.  it is no less fitting that the physicians should know these secrets, for Pliny wrote and petrus Aponiensis says that it is when the sea is ebbing that all men and animals die which die a natural death; certainly a secret which is worth noting.  In order that it may be known perpetually at what hour of day or night the flow or ebb of the sea beings, let the age of the moon be noted and the day on which it is desired to find out the hour when the flow and ebb commences; let one look it up in the appended table in the first column to the left-hand side, and opposite it on the right-hand side is found the hour when the flow and ebb commences, noting that the letter M means morning or before midday, and the letter T evening or after midday, that the letters ME signify midday, and the letters NO night.
  43. ANOTHER WONDER AND THE PROGNOSTICATION OF THE MOON AND OF THE SIGNS AS REGARDS FOOD.
    If the moon of the month of January enters the sign of Aquarius when waxing it denotes plenty of food in that year; and if it is waning when it enters it, it denotes poverty, sorrow and hardship, overflow of rivers, and great storms at sea.
    If the moon of February enters the sign Pisces when waxing, it will cause things to be at a cheap price and easily obtained; and if it is waning when it enters it, it denotes abundance of rain that year.
    If the moon of March enters the sign of Aries when waxing, and it is to the north, it denotes insipidity and restlessness; and if it is waning when it enters it, it denotes a good fruitful year.
    If the moon of April enters the sign Taurus when waxing, it denotes much good, contentment and joy; if it enters it waning, it denotes the opposite.
    If the moon of May enters the sign Gemini when waxing, it denotes commotion, trouble and change in the regions whose sign that is; and if it is waning when it enters it, it denotes much rain.
    If the Moon of June enters Cancer when waxing, it denotes change, commotion and everything turned topsy turvey in the empire of Africa; and if it is waning when it enters it, it denotes much rain.
    If the moon of July enters Leo when waxing, it denotes good and great profit to husbandmen; and if it is waning when it enters it, it denotes hardship, danger and diseases.
    If the moon of August enters Virgo when waxing, it denotes whirlwinds, storms and earthquake; and if it is waning when it enters it, it denotes a good prosperous year as regard food.
    If the moon of September enters Libra when waxing, it denotes plenty of all sorts of grain; but if it is waning when it enters it, it denotes storms and disturbances.
    If the moon of October enters Scorpio when waxing, it denotes enmity and strife between lawyers, and envy; but if it waning when it enters it, it denotes a prosperous and plentiful year in the regions whose sign it is.
    If the moon of November enters Sagittarius when waxing, there will be no lack of water or oil that year; but if it is waning when it enters it, it denotes famine and likelihood of plague.
    If the moon of December enters Capricorn when waxing, it denotes great storms at sea; and if it is waning when it enters it, it denotes contentment and joy for the husbandmen who labor the ground.  But be it noted [with regard to] every thing signified here, that it is in the regions which these signs govern that it will happen more particularly than in other places; and if it be desired to find out which regions are under the government of each sign, that will be found in the place where we shall treat of the signs themselves.
  THE FIFTH CHAPTER
  1. WHICH SHOWS THE PROPERTIES OF THE TWELVE SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC.
    In the ninth sphere (which is called Chrystallinum) the astronomers postulate a circulum i.e., a round ring which they call zodiacum, of 360 degrees altogether, and of 12 degrees in width, and they divide this into 12 equal parts which are called the twelve signs of the Zodiac; and there are 30 degrees in each of these signs; and the names of those signs are Aries, Taur5us, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpius, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, and Piscis.  These names were given to them because of the properties which they give to the creatures when the sun enters them.  They are called another name, viz., the House of the Planets, because when a planet happens to be in its own sign (i.e., in its own house) it is more powerful and more vigorous than when it is in another sign; and the length of each sign is 273,870,047 leagues, and the breadth of each sign 22,818,258 leagues; and if it be desired to find out about the houses of the planets, we shall tell that briefly; for the sign which is called Leo is the house of the sun, Cancer the house of the moon, Capricornus and Aquarius the houses of Saturn, Pisces and Sagittarius the houses of Jupiter, Aries and Scorpio the houses of Mars, Libra and Taurus the houses of Venus, Gemini and Virgo the houses of Mercury.  When the sun enters these signs it has a change of property according to the nature of each sign, as shall be shown in its own place; likewise there will be shown the property and the natural secret of these houses or these signs, and the things which they produce in sick or delicate people when the moon enters them.
  2. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN AQUARIUS WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 21ST OF JANUARY.
    The form or figure which astronomers give to this sign is the form of a man pouring water out of a vessel; nevertheless it is not because it is so in reality (for it is not so at all) but because of the abundance of water which falls.  The property of this sign is [to be] warm and moist, and it is the cause of immoderate heat and moisture.  It is very harmful, for it works corruption on the air and consequently damage to the plants and growing things.  The sun enters this sign on the 21st day of January usually, i.e., on the 11th day of the same month here in Ireland (be it noted that this book is entirely after the method of the Pope, nevertheless profit may be derived here by taking account of the difference of ten days of time between [the reckonings] until the year 1700, and from that onward there is the difference of 11 days between them).  This sign is airy, masculine, diurnal; it is a diurnal house and exaltation for Saturn, and nocturnal detriment to the sun.  This sign governs the provinces of Aragon, Bohemia, Saxony, Ethiopia, Dalmatia, Arabia, Sogdiana, Azania, Piamonte, and India; the cities Constantia, Jerusalem, Urbino, Pavia, and Monserrat; in Spain the cities Zamora, Medina, Valencia, and Seville.  The man who is born under the dominion of this sign will be of medium stature, wellspoken, secretive, stouthearted in going ahead with any project he may set before him; it signifies that he will receive a blow from iron and be in danger by water; he will be given to travel in foreign lands, and he will succeed better there than in his own country; it signifies that if he returns he will be fortunate and wealthy; but let him beware of getting angry, for it would be injurious for him.  In certo quodam anno erit in dubio vitae suae, because it signifies for him a grievous illness before the thirtieth year; and if he recovers from it, it signifies according to his nature and complexion 58 years of life.  If it is a woman which shall be born under it, it signifies that she will be industrious and regardful of herself; she will be in danger of death and in addition once again by water.  She will not spend her goods easily, and she will find her life better about the middle of her age; nevertheless, before the 38th year it signifies for her two illnesses; the first illness at the end of the 34th year, and the other illness at the end of the 35th year; and if she recovers from them it signifies for her naturally 82 years of life.
  3. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN PISCIS WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 19TH OF FEBRUARY.
    The figure and form given to this sign is two fishes, so that (as it is the nature of the fish to be wet and in the water usually) similarly when the sun enters this sign the weather is wet and watery.  This sign is feminine, nocturnal, watery and common to the winter and the spring.  It is of a wet and watery nature, on which account it is the cause of cold and moisture immoderately, which does harm to the water of the rivers, the wells and the lakes, for it makes corruption in them.  This sign is the house of the day and night for Jupiter, exaltation for Venus, fall and nocturnal detriment and sorrow to Mercury.  This sign has government over the provinces of Persia, Hibernia, Normandia, Portugallia, Lydia, Sicilia, Pamphylia Garamantes, Mesamenes:  over the cities Colonia, Agrippina, Venecia, Ratisbona, and Alexandria; in Spain, over the cities Orense, Santiago and part of Seville.  The man who is born under this sign is fond of foreign countries and travelling by water; he is of a great appetite, and on that account will be in danger of death unless his planet help him; he will be taciturn; it denotes a sickness for him at the end of his fifteenth year, and another sickness at the end of the thirtieth, and the third sickness at the end of his 38th year of life, and if he recovers from them it is natural for him to have 65 years of life.  The woman who is born under it is religious, honest, bashful; but she will suffer from inflammation of the eyes and suffocatio matricis:  it signifies that she will receive hurt from fire, and that she will be sick at the end of her 12th year, and once again at the end of her 20th and 21st years, and again at the end of her 30th; but it signifies 59 years of life.
  4. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN ARIES WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 21ST DAY OF MARCH.
    The figure and form which is given to this sign is a ram.  It is of the nature of fire, warm and dry; accordingly it causes heat and drought moderately.  It is diurnal, mobile and masculine.  It is the house of Mars, exaltation for Sol, fall for Saturn and detriment for Venus:  the sun enters it on the 21st of March and then commences the first Equinox, in which the length of day and night are equal.  It governs the provinces Anglia, Gallia, alemania, and Polonia Minor; the cities Florencia, Napoles, patavia, Favencia, Cracovia, Inmola, Pergamo; in Spain, Zaragoza, Tortosa and Valladolid.
    The man who is born under the government of this sign is intellectual, wise, of magnanimous mind; nevertheless he is talkative, irascible, but easily appeased:  it is characteristic of him to be talking to himself, not too rich nor too poor, faithful to his friends; he will have enough to subsist on mortuorum causa; it signifies that there will be a special mark on his body and that he will get a beating from a fourfooted beast, and another blow from iron; but finally he will be unfortunate, hardworked; he will be sick at the end of his 22nd year, and, if he gets over that, then forsan ducet uxorem and he will get according to his nature 75 years of life.
    The woman who is born under it will be irascible and very lively and vivacious in her actions, pleasing according to other people’s opinions; nevertheless it signifies, if she marries, that she will be a widow, and that she will suffer from a dangerous disease of the head or knee from the seventh year of her age until the twelfth, but that she will get of natural life 49 years.  This sign signifies both for man and woman that they will come to be very poor, nevertheless they will achieve independence through their own good industry.
  5. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN TAURUS WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 20TH DAY OF APRIL.
    The figure or form given to this sign is a bull.  Its property is earthy, cold and dry.  it causes coldness and dryness, nevertheless moderately, whence it comes that sentient things are begotten and growing things grow when the sun enters it.  This sign is nocturnal, feminine.  it is the house of Venus and her joy, exaltation to Luna, and detriment and sorrow to Mars.  It has dominion over the provinces Persia, Media, Suycia, Asia Minor, Hibernia, Egypt, Armenia, and Cyprus:  over the cities Capua, Salerno, Bolonia, Sena, Verona, Ancona, Treveres, parma, Mantua and Palermo; in Spain, over Gitona, Osca, Toro, Badajos, Astorga, and Jaen.  The man who is born under the dominion of this sign will be bold, proud, haughty, and of highly vain heart; inclined to leave his country and travel in a foreign land, where he will succeed better, and if he marries he will get means with his wife; he will be fortunate, and in an important position:  it signifies that he will receive an injury from dogs, and danger by water, and in addition, unless he take care, he will receive infortunia mulierum causa, and that he will be sick at the end of his 12th year and again at 30, and once again at 40, and if he recovers from these he will get naturally 64 years of life.  It signifies that the woman who is born under it will be very busy, careful in worldly things, economic, partial to foreign lands; she will be fertile and have many sons, et plures indicat ei habere maritos; it signifies a fall from a height, and sickness at the end of her 16th year, and once again at 33.  This sign promises naturally 66 years of life.
  6. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN GEMINI WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 21ST DAY OF MAY.
    The form or figure given to this sign is two children embracing each other in a very friendly way, denoting the mildness of the weather when the sun enters it.  This sign is of an airy, warm, wet nature; accordingly it is suitable for growing things.  It is the house of Mercury, detriment and sorrow to Jupiter.  It is masculine, diurnal, and is warm and dry in the spring usually; but it is dry then moderately.  It has dominion over the provinces Hircania, Cyrenaica, Marmatica, part of Egypt, Armenia Margiana; over the cities Trent, Cessena, Viterbo, Nuremberg, Bruges, Leon of France and Maguncia; in Spain, over Ciguenca, Morviedra, Cordova, and Talavera.  The man who is born under this sign is goodhearted and generous; inclined for other lands and travelling in them; he will be wealthy and steadfast in the things which he promises, will be earnest, and in danger by water; it will be necessary for him to beware of mad dogs, and I enjoin him to be watchful of himself for it signifies that he will have many wounds, and that he will be sick four times before he comes to 30 years, and if he recovers from them that he will be more healthy, and that he will get 68 years of life.  The woman who is born under it will be very faithful, and well thought of by other people, and will be inclined for marriage; she will receive sorrow and regret for wrong done to her, and she will not be free from ill health, and she will get 62 years of natural life.
  7. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN CANCER WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 22ND OF JUNE.
    The figure or form given to this sign is a certain fish which is called Cancer, and it is of a watery, cold, wet, feminine, nocturnal and mobile nature, because when the sun enters it the weather changes to damp and moderate cold, so that it is good for growth.  It is the house of the day and the night to the Moon, exaltation to Jupiter, detriment to Saturn, and fall to Mars.  it has dominion over the provinces Numedia, Holland, Norvegia, Zelanda, Bithonia, Burgundia, Scotia, Rhodes, Lydia, Ethiopia, Africa, Colgis, and Phrygia; over the cities Constantinople, Milan, Pisa, Lucca, Venice, Tunis, and Genova; in Spain, over Compostela, Lisbon, Granada, and Barcelona.  The man who is born under it is of medium stature, merry and humble; it signifies that he will get trouble by law, and that he will be inclined toward that and to defend the case of another person, and that he will be very spend-thrift; it signifies dangers by water, fire and iron; and that he will be bold and well esteemed; it signifies for him minor ailments, and that he will get 73 years of natural life.  The woman who is born under it will be earnest, industrious, swift to wrath and to recover from it, grateful, amiable:  children numerous and troubles about them; it denotes that she will get a fall from a height and will find hidden things but of small value; she will be healthy and will get 70 years of natural life.
  8. CONCERNING  THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN LEO WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 23RD OF JULY.
    The figure which is given to this sign is a lion.  It is of a warm and excessively dry nature, masculine, diurnal, fixed, because when the sun enters it the heat is complete and steadfast, and it cause the destruction and withering of the growing things.  It is the house of the night and day to Sol, detriment and sorrow to Saturn.  It has dominion over the [following] provinces, i.e., over some of Sicily, and some of Apulia, Bohemia, and the coasts of the Red Sea, Chaldea, Italy, Greece, Turkey, Propontis, the Alps and Macedonia; over the cities Rome, Ravenna, Cremona, Usma, Croton, Damascus and Prague; in Spain, over Murcia and Leon.  The man who is born under it will be shapely, handsome, magnanimous, proud, eloquent; and if he gives himself to learning will be wise; it signifies that he will get high positions, and that he will travel in many countries; and if he marries he will get something to spend with his wife; it signifies that he will get a severe blow from iron, and danger from water, and he will be lucky at getting wealth and sometimes inveniet pecuniam absconditam; it signifies for him six illnesses during his life, but the most dangerous illness of them is at the end of his 40th year, and if he gets over it this sign promises him 71 years of natural life.  The woman who is born under it will be handsome, ill-mannered, strong, haughty; it signifies that she will suffer from stomach trouble, and that she will be fond of honor, and will be rich, but will be merciful to the poor, and prone to menorrhagia and many other diseases, but to it especially, and she will get naturally 71 years of life.
  9. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN VIRGO WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 24TH OF AUGUST.
    The figure or form of this sign is a virgin, signifying the unfruitfulness of the earth at this time.  It is of an earthy, cold, dry nature; it is feminine, nocturnal, melancholic, and common to summer and autumn.  It is the house, joy and exaltation of Mercury; fall to Venus, and nocturnal detriment to Jupiter.  It governs the provinces Greece, part of Phenicia and Babylonia, Assyria, Mesopotamia, Cicilia, Rhodes and Candia; the cities Pavia, Paris, Ferrara, Toulouse, Pasencia and Corinth; in Spain, Lerida, Toledo, Avilla and Algecira.  The man who is born under it is honorable, chaste and of honorable condition; it signifies that he will be earnest and careful about his business, and striving for high rank; in addition, it signifies that he will be modest, changeable, and after being rich that he will come to great poverty, from not being wise enough to govern himself; he will suffer from a few diseases until 30 years of age, and if he escapes from them his nature is to have 84 years of life.  The woman who is born under it is modest, earnest, devout; it signifies that she will fall from a height, and that she will be delicate; she will be anxious to be clean and chaste, and she will come to have hardships; it signifies a dangerous illness from the 30th year to the 36th, and if she escapes from it she will get 77 years of natural life.
  10. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN LIBRA WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 23RD OF SEPTEMBER.
    The figure given to this sign is a balance of two scales, signifying the equality of days and nights about that time; and when the sun enters it the second equinox takes place, in which the night and day are of equal length. This sign is of the nature of the air, i.e., warm and moist.  It is the cause of heart and thick moisture; accordingly it causes the air to coagulate so that it is harmful to every beast, and it generates many diseases.  It is the house of the day of Venus, fall to Sol, exaltation to Saturn, and detriment to Mars.  It has dominion over the provinces Austria, Casperia, Bactriana Regio, Tuscia, and Syria; over the cities Valencia, Lodi, Parma, Gaeta, Viana and Augusta; in Spain, over Burgos, Almeria, and Salamanca.  The man who is born under this sign is honorable, courageous, and important in his deeds, inclined for foreign lands, where he will succeed better than in his own country; it signifies that he will have something to spend, but that he will find poverty and hardship; it signifies a sickness for him at the end of his 18th year, and once again at 35, and the first sickness at the end of his 6th year, and if he escapes from them he will get 77 years of natural life.  The woman who is born under it will be merry and familiar:  it signifies that she will get a wound of the foot from fire, and that she will be inclined to travel in the world, and if she escapes from the fated sickness she will get 66 years of natural life.
  11. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN SCORPIO WHICH THE SUN  ENTERS ON THE 24TH OF OCTOBER.
    The figure which is given to this sign is a poisonous beast which has a sting with which it does harm, as it does with its mouth, signifying that the sun, when it enters it, does the like, causing cold and storms, thunders and lightnings.  It is of a nature wet, cold, feminine, nocturnal and fixed, because the autumn is then in its strength.  It is the house of the night and joy to Mars, fall to Luna, detriment and sorrow to Venus.  This sign has dominion over the provinces Scotia, and over the coasts of the sea, Syria, Mauretania, Getulia, Cappadocia, and Judea; over the cities Messina, Padua, Aquilea, Crema, and Buxia; in Spain, over Valencia, Xativa, Segovia, Tudela, Braga, Malaga, and Burgos.  The man who is born under it will be of evil nature, deceitful, adulterous, violent, double-minded and thievish; he will be grave, friendly, sweet-spoken, though malicious.  Sed sapiens dominabitur astris.  It signifies that he will be prone to disease in his stomach and testicles, and that he will incur danger from stone and iron; he will be inclined for other lands and will be guileful and flattering in his words and in his actions without the knowledge of others; and he will not be very rich or very poor; he will suffer from petty ailments, but he will get naturally 61 years of life.  The woman who is born under it will be friendly, but she will be strong and haughty, and it signifies that habeat cicatrices in maximum periculum vitae, and that she will frequently suffer from stomach trouble and will be delicate, but naturally she will get 72 years of life.
  12. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN SAGITTARIUS WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 23RD OF NOVEMBER.
    The figure of this sign is an archer shooting arrows, signifying how the sign acts when the sun enters it, throwing rains, hail, thunder and fiery balls.  It is of the nature of fire, warm and dry, masculine, diurnal, and common to autumn and winter.  It is the house of the day and joy to Jupiter, and daily detriment to Mercury.  It has dominion over the provinces Hispania, Arabia Felix, Sclavonia, Dalmatia, Helvetia, and part of Liguria; over the cities, Malta, Avignon, Jerusalem, Asta, and Milan; in Spain over Jaen, Calahorra, and Medina Celi.  The man who is born under the dominion of this sign is modest, honest, upright, fortunate; it signifies that he will be inclined to go on the sea, on which he will find a better fortune.  It signifies that he will receive harm from a fourfooted animal, and sickness at the end of the seventh year of his age and again at 18, but if he escapes from them he will get 67 years of life.  The woman who is born under it will be taciturn, fearful, shy and rich, and she will be called the mother of children; but the woman and the man likewise will be changeable, unsteady, nevertheless they will be merciful and conscientious.  The woman will have a sickness at the end of her fourth year, once again at 22, and once again at the end of her 40th year, and if she escapes from them she will get 57 years of natural life.
  13. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN CAPRICORNUS WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 22ND OF DECEMBER.
    The figure which is given to this sign is a goat which goes into high places, signifying that, when the sun enters it, it is rising towards us and the days getting longer.  It is of an earthy nature, cold and dry, feminine, nocturnal and mobile; for the autumn passes and the winter begins.  It is the house of the night for Saturn, exaltation for Mars, fall for Jupiter, and detriment for Luna.  it has dominion over the provinces Macedonia, Bavaria, Portugal, Romandiola, Albania, Muscovy, Gedrocia, Thrace, Croatia, India, and part of Sclavonia; over the cities Verona, Forlivio, Savoy, Favencia, and Consatantinople; in Spain over Tortosa, Soria, and Carmona.  The man who is born under it will be wrathful, vain, lying.  It signifies that he will be talking to himself; he will be melancholic, greathearted, inclined to war, et gaudebit bonis alienis, et habebit curam de animalibus quadri-pedibus.  It signifies that he will find trouble causa mulierum, will be delicate, and will get 77 years of natural life.  The woman who is born under it will be of an exceedingly perverse nature, and will be very extravagant; it signifies that a fourfooted animal will bite her, and danger of falling from a height; she will be sick, but lightly, and will get naturally 69 years of life.
  14. ASTRONOMICAL RULE FOR KNOWING THE SIGN OF THE HOUR IN WHICH A PERSON IS BORN.
    To know these, figures and such like are no longer necessary, but only to pay heed to three things, viz., first, a knowledge of the sign in which the sun will be on the day on which the person will be born; secondly, a knowledge of the hour in which the sun rises that day; thirdly, an accurate knowledge of the hour in which he was born.  After knowing these three things, one must see how many hours have elapsed from the rising of the sun until the hour in which he was born exclusive, (that is to say, not to reckon the hour the sun rose).  Then reckon a sign for every two of those hours, from the sign in which the sun will be that day to the sign of the hour in which he was born inclusive, and in this way the natural sign of every person will be found.  And in case there should be an hour over [i.e., after dividing by two] to the hours from sunrise to the hour of his birth, let it be reckoned to the sign following; and in case it does not amount to a full hour, let no scruple be made of that, for the rule is not faulty on that account.  It is easy to understand everything when it is illustrated by an example:  accordingly I say that the person who was born on the 4th of August, at one o’clock p.m., his sign is Scorpio (I mean a person who was born in Valencia); because the sun rises there at 5 o’clock about that time, and from 5 till 1 p.m. is eight hours, which signifies four signs; and as it is in the sign Leo the sun was that day, I count four signs from it inclusive, and that is Scorpio.  Another example of a person who was born in Italy the 10th day of October, at half-past eleven p.m., and according to the rule I say that Gemini is his sign; for about that time the sun here is in the sign Libra, and it rises in Italy then at half-past five, and from half-past five till half past eleven p.m. is eighteen hours, which signifies nine signs, and the ninth sign from the sign Libra is the sign Gemini which we have said, and that is the proper sign of that person.  And in case that curiosity should inquire of what use are those signs, or what nature do they give, our reply is that the signs are common and general to every man who is born in the month which they serve; and although they have great influence over the person born in that month, yet that is little compared with the nature given by the sign of the hour in which he was born, for it is by that that his property and his nature are best judged.  Be it noted that if a person is born before the sun has risen, that belongs to the day before; for it is from sunrise that the Astrologers begin the day.
  THE SEVENTH CHAPTER.
  1. CONCERNING ANOTHER NATURAL PROGNOSTICATION OF THE TIME ACCORDING TO ARISTOTLE, PLINY AND PTOLEMY, WHICH IS VERY RELIABLE.
  Of the Comets and their Properties in General.
    Comets (according to famous philosophers) are clear-shining, hot, dry fumes (which are called exhalationes) which are drawn by the excessive heat of the sun to the upper regions of the air, and then from being so near to the other element fire, and the air moving them, they kindle, and according as they are dense or rare they last without dissipating.  These signs, or these comets, signify according to the same authors, misfortunes, such as war, strifes, famine, injury, plagues and death of princes and powerful people.  Be it noted that it is by the form and color of the comets that the things may be known which they signify, and in the case of eclipses by their colors.  Accordingly, if the comet or the eclipse be dark, and as one might think greenish, it will be of the nature of Saturn, and so it signifies death, plague, great cold, frost and snow, dark air, storm, whirlwinds, earthquake, flood and famine.  If it is reddish in color, it will be of the nature of Jupiter, and so signifies death of kings and of a powerful man.  The form of this comet is to be great, round, and like a human face as it were.  If its color be red and flaming, and a long tail to it, it will be of the nature of Mars, and if it is in the east, and its tail up over its head, that signifies in the west great famine, war, earthquake, damage to water, and destruction of cities and kingdoms.  If its color be very pale, and it be terrible to see and close to the sun, it will be of the nature of the sun, and so signifies change of lordship, damage to fruits, death to kings and rich and powerful people.  If it be golden in color, it will be of the nature of Venus, and if its appearance be like the moon, and long-haired and leaving rays behind it, it signifies harm to powerful people, new beliefs, and especially in those places towards which it points its tail.  If its color be blue, or if it be of many colors, and of small body with a long tail, it will be of the nature of Mercury: accordingly it signifies the death of a great prince, schism, war, famine, much thunder, and lightning along with the thunder.  If it be silver colored, and that more shining than the color of the other stars, it will be of the nature of Luna, i.e., of the nature of the moon, and so signifies plenty of food, and especially if Jupiter happens at that time to be in the sign Cancer or Pisces; and be it noted, if the comet be seen in the east, that it will produce its effect very shortly in the lands which are under the dominion of the sign with which it appears, and if it shall be seen in the west it will have its effect more slowly.
  2. CONCERNING THE CANICULAR DAYS AND THE TIME THEY BEGIN AND END.
    Because I think that there are many who would like to learn what is the cause of these canicular days, or what time they begin and end, we shall show briefly these three things.  Tere are found, then, in the eighth sphere two constellations, i.e., two sets of stars, which are called Canis Minor and Canis Major, i.e., the lesser dog and the greater dog, and they are of the nature of Mars.  But Canis Minor, in which are two stars according to Ptolemy, is of the nature of Mars and Mercury.  Distinguished authors say that Canis Minor is the cause of these days namely, Pliny, Lib. 18, cap. 28, and King Alfonsus in tabulis astronomicis, and let us follow their opinion, for we see that it is nearest to reason and experience.  This Canis Minor rises along with the sun on the horizon of Valencia (horizon means the amount of earth which is in the compass of the vision of every man) when that planet enters the first degree of the sign Leo, and it does that every year on the 24th July, and accordingly these canicular days begin in Valencia about that time, and they end on the second day of September.  It is the common opinion of astronomers and physicians that these days last for 40 days, i.e., the time occupied by the sun from the time of rising with Canicula (i.e., the little dog) until it traverses the whole sign of Leo.  This space of time is so harsh and hurtful that Hippocrates, in advising physicians, said that they should not give any treatment to sick folk about that time.  Pliny says in his Natural History, Lib. 2, that wine changes at this time, and that dogs get rabid from the excessive heat and dryness caused by the sun together with the sign Leo (its natural proper house) and with Canicula, about this time; and accordingly I pray every man to watch himself well about this time, and to give enough water to the dogs, and to make them swim, in order that their natural heat may be subdued, for that is very hurtful, and may God save us from it all. Amen.  
  Cities and Towns  Days and Months.  Cities and Towns of Spain.  Days and Months of Spain.                        
  Valencia    24 July     Villena         23 July
  Mallorca    24 July     Alicante        23 July
  Origuela    22 July     Sevilla         22 July
  Minorca   24 July     Lisbon          24 July
  Cordova     23 July     Calatrava       24 July
  Cartagena   23 July     Alcantara       24 July
  Murcia      22 July     Barcelona       25 July
  Granada   22 July     Toledo          25 July
  Malaga      22 July     Madrid          25 July
  Ubeda     23 July     Cuenca          25 July   
    This is a table which shows the hour the canicular days begin in the above cities.
  4. YEARLY PROGNOSTICATION OF THE DAY ON WHICH THE CANICULA BEGINS.
    The author Diaferes wrote that if it is in Aries the moon is on the day that Canicula beings (i.e., rises), there will be much water in the following year, little wheat, abundance of oil, but death of cattle.  If it is in Taurus that the moon is on that day, the wheat will be scarce, there will be much rain, hail—a laborious and wretched year.  If it is in Gemini that it is, bread, wine and fruit will be plentiful, but diseases will be so (also).  If it is in Cancer, wheat and water will be scarce.  If it is in Leo, wheat, wine and oil will be plentiful, fruit dear, earthquakes, storms at sea and floods.  If in Virgo, the year will be fruitful, the water plentiful, and pregnant women will bear dead children prematurely, and cattle will be cheap.  If in Libra, oil will be scarce, wine plentiful, wheat and walnuts will fail, but the hazel-nuts and the chestnuts will be plentiful.  If it is in Scorpio that it is, many of the bees and silkworms will die, there will be unwholesome air and little silk.  If it be in Sagittarius, wheat, water and birds will be plentiful, but the cattle will not be so.  If it be in Capricornus that the moon will be on the day that Canicula begins, i.e., rises, wheat, wine, oil and every other food and water will be plentiful.  If it be in Aquarius that the moon will be, wheat and water will be scarce; but the worms which are called langosta, i.e., worms which do great damage to the corn, will not be so, and plagues are dangerous that year.  If it be in the sign of Pisces that the moon will be on the day the canicular month begins, wheat, rain and disease will be plentiful, and likewise the wine, but the birds will not be so—sed Deus super omnia.
  6. TABLE OF MANY CITIES AND TOWNS IN SPAIN AND OUT OF IT FOR WHICH THE FOLLOWING TABLE SERVES WHICH TREATS OF NEW AND FULL MOON.
  Cities      Hrs.    Qrs.    Cities.     Hrs.    Qrs.
  C. Valencia   0 0   Zaragoza    0 0
  C. Lerida   0 0   B. Pamplona   0 0—
  C. Valles   0 --    B. Soria    0 0—
  C. Barcelona    0 --    B. Oliete   0 0—
  C. Mallorca   0 1   B. Toledo   0 1
  C. Genova   1 0   B. Almeria    0 1
  C. Milan    1 0   B. Burgos   0 1
  C. Cerdeña    1 0   B. Granada    0 1
  C. Venecia    0 1--   B. Valladolid   0 1—
  C. Roma   0 1--   B. Salamanca    0 2
  C. Napoles    1 1   B. Sevilla    0 1
  C. Florencia    0 1--   B. Cadiz    0 2
  C. Palermo    1 2   B. Lisbon   0 1
  C. Salerno    1   2   B. Gibraltar    0 1
  C. Taranto    1   3   B. Cordova    0 1
  7. ASTROLOGICAL RULES VERY PROFITABLE FOR BLEEDING AND OTHER MEDICAL TREATMENT.
    It is necessary to observe four things in order to let blood, viz., the time, the age, the custom or the habit and the complexion of the person.  In addition to this, Avicenna says that, as regards bleeding, heed should be paid to two occasions, viz., a necessary occasion and an optional occasion, i.e., when the blood is drawn to keep the health, (and the best time for that is warm weather, namely, after sunrise), and to digest the food; nevertheless, even for this the advice of the doctors is good.  The necessary occasion is when a sudden illness comes, and it relieves it to draw blood, as in the case of sharp fever, pleurisy, &c., which brook no delay.  But speaking of the optional occasion, I say with Ptolemy in Centiloquio, Verbo 20, that it is dangerous and ignorant to draw blood from a part over which the moon is ruling.
  8. RULE WHICH SHOWS THE TIME WHEN IT IS GOOD AND BAD TO TAKE A PURGE.
    It is a common and customary rule with learned physicians not to give laxative medicine in the excessive heat of summer or in the great cold of winter, as Hippocrates says in quinto aphorismo, particula 4.: Sub cane et ante canem molesta sunt pharmacia, et medicamentorum usus difficilis.  He also says in lib. de aere, aquis et locis, that it is not good in very changeable weather to give treatment such as cauteries, stretching arms, or any treatment at all, and further, not to do it in the time of the solstices and the equinoxes, and these times and this astrological judgment are so important that Hippocrates said in lib. epidemiae, Hujus modi medicus est qui astrologiam ignorat nemo, &c., i.e., that he is no physician who is ignorant of the science called astrology.  The best time in the year, then, for a purge is the spring for people who are not in need of it.  It is not good to take a purge, or further, to let blood, on the day of new moon, and likewise on the day before that and the day after it.  It is not good, further, to take a purge when the moon is in a sign which is ruminant, namely, Aries, Taurus and Capricornus, because it does not keep it in the stomach without rejecting it; nevertheless, if it be thought good to (purge) by vomiting, that is the best time to take it.  Every time the moon is in a watery sign it is good to take a purge, but if it be a drink it is better that the moon should be in the sign Scorpio: and if it be a bolus that the moon should be in Cancer; and if it be pills that the moon should be in Pisces.  Accordingly, if heed be given to this order the purge will work well and healthily, and there will be good health after it without doubt; and be it noted that these are the watery signs, Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces.
  9. TABLE SHOWING THE BEST TIME FOR PURGING AND BLOODLETTING AND THE BAD TIME.
  Sign      Governs   Purge     Blood       
  Aries     head      bad     good
  Aries     head      bad     good
  Aries     head      bad     good
  Taurus      neck      bad     bad
  Taurus      neck      bad     bad
  Gemini      arms      moderate    bad
  Gemini      arms      moderate    bad
  Cancer      breast      good      moderate
  Cancer      breast      good      moderate
  Leo     heart     bad     bad
  Leo     heart     bad     bad
  Leo     heart     bad     bad
  Virgo     abdomen   bad     bad
  Virgo     abdomen   bad     bad
  Libra     hips      moderate    good
  Libra     hips      moderate    good
  Scorpio   private parts   good      moderate
  Scorpio   private parts   good      moderate
  Scorpio   private parts   good      moderate
  Sagittarius   thighs      moderate    good
  Sagittarius   thighs      moderate    good
  Capricornus   knees     bad     bad
  Capricornus   knees     bad     bad
  Aquarius    shins     moderate    good
  Aquarius    shins     moderate    good
  Pisces      feet      good      moderate
  Pisces      feet      good      moderate
  Pisces      feet      good      moderate
    Since we have shown the dangerous time for letting blood, it is proper here to show the time in which it is good to let it, so that it shall be profitable and wholesome.  In the case of choleric people it is wholesome for them to let blood when the moon is in watery signs, namely, Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces—especially in the last 15 degrees of them.  For phlegmatic people it is good when the moon is in the warm or fiery signs (with the exception of Leo), namely, Aries and Sagittarius.  For melancholic people it is good when the moon is in the airy signs (with the exception of Gemini), namely, Libra and Aquarius.  For sanguinary people, every hour and every sign in which the moon shall be is good, if the rules of medicine and astronomy are kept which we have given already.
  10. ASTRONOMICAL JUDGMENT ON THE NATURAL DISEASES.
    If a sick man wishes to know what the end of his sickness is, let him look how many days have passed since the dog days in the country in which he is until the day his sickness seized him (inclusive), and from that let him subtract the number 36 as many times as it can be subtracted, and let him look up the remainder in the following table, and the letter which is opposite that number will show the end of the sickness, noting that this letter (M) signifies death, and this letter (V) that he will live and [recover from the sickness], and that this letter (L) signifies a long and laborious sickness, and that the number which has not a letter opposite it signifies that it is not known whether he will live or die: and let the careful reader give heed to this rule.
  TABLE.
    1 --- M.    13  --- M.    25  --- M.
    2 --- V.    14  --- V.    26  --- V.
    3 --- L.    15  --- L.    27  --- V.
    4 --- V.    16  --- V.    28  --- M.
    5 --- L.    17  --- V.    29  --- L.
    6 --- M.    18  --- M.    30  --- M.
    7 --- M.    19  --- L.    31  --- L.
    8 --- L.    20  --- V.    32  --- M.
    9 --- V.    21  --- M.    33  --- V.
    10  --- M.    22  ---     34  --- L.
    11  --- V.    23  --- V.    35  --- V.
    12  --- V.    24  --- M.    36. --- V.    
  11. ANOTHER JUDGMENT ON THE SAME THING. 
    The author Guido Aretino says to put the milk of a woman who has born a son in the water of the sick person, and if they stick together it is a certain sign that he will recover from that sickness, but if the contrary happens it is a sign of death.
  12. ANOTHER JUDGMENT.
    The author Bernardus Granullachs in sua Cronographia says to let a drop of the sick man’s blood, shortly after drawing it, fall into a vessel in which there shall be very clean water, and if it sinks without spreading itself through the water it is a sign that he will recover, but if it spreads on the water and remains on the surface it is a sign of death.
  13. A WONDERFUL AND FAMOUS JUDGEMENT ON NATURAL DISEASE ACCORDING TO THE AGE OF THE MOON, WHOSE AUTHOR WAS NICHOLAS FLORENTINUS, A LEARNED AND VERY DISTINGUISHED PHYSICIAN.
  It cannot be denied that the stars and other heavenly bodies work and cause great change in human and terrestrial bodies; and since the moon is the star and planet which does this most, from its being nearer to us and more changeable in itself than the other stars, for that reason Nicholas Florentinus says that, in order that the end of a natural sickness may be known, two things should be noted, i.e., an accurate knowledge of the day one took ill, or in which he felt himself dissatisfied about his sickness, and secondly, certain knowledge of the day of the first appearance of the moon in which he is: then let him consider the days that have passed from the new moon until the day he took sick, and let them be counted (inclusive), and let him look up that number in the following table, and opposite that number will be found out what will be the end of that sickness.  But be it noted that, although the planets effect this change naturally in earthly bodies, God can prevent that, for He is almighty; and in order that this may be understood, I suppose that some one took ill on the sixth day of February, and that the new moon was on the 29th day of January: I count those days inclusive, i.e., putting three days of January with six days of February, and that makes nine days: I look up that number in the table, and I find opposite it a grievous but nor mortal sickness.  With this the whole table will be understood.
  14. TABLE BY WHICH MAY BE KNOWN THE END OF THE NATURAL SICKNESS.
    1. If one takes ill on the day of new moon, he will be in danger until the 14th, 21st and
      28th day, but after that it signifies health.
    2. Here, it signifies danger before the 14th day; after that he will be better.
    3. Here, a short but not troublesome sickness.
    4. Here, a very dangerous sickness until the twenty-first day, but if he recovers from that he will be well.
    5. Here, a troublesome but not mortal sickness.
    6. Here, it signifies that, unless he is well shortly, he will have a troublesome sickness, but on the fifth day of the moon he will be well.
    7. Here, he will be well shortly.
    8. Here, unless he be well in 12 or 14 days, he will be in danger.
    9. Here, a grievous but not mortal sickness.
    10. Here, danger before the 15th day.
    11. Here, death or life shortly.
    12. Here, unless he is well before the 15th day, he will die.
    13. Here, a very troublesome sickness until the 18th day and if he recovers from that, he will be well.
    14. Here, he will be sick 15 days, but after that he will improve.
    15. Here, unless he is well by four days, he will be in danger of death, or as another author says, he will go to the door of death.
    16. Here, he will be sick until the 18th day, and if he recovers from that he will be well.
    17. Here, if he goes beyond the 18th day, he will be well.
    18. Here, unless he is well shortly, he will be a long time sick and in danger.
    19. Here, he will be well shortly, if he gets good regimen.
    20. Here, he will be in danger until the 6th or 7th day, and if he recovers from that, he will be well.
    21. Here, unless he dies within 10 days, he will be well with the new moon.
    22. Here, within 10 or 12 days he will be well.
    23. Here, he will be well the next month at latest.
    24. Here, unless he is well in 22 days, or by the new moon of the next month, he will be in danger.
    25. Here, unless he dies within six days, he will be well, nevertheless with difficulty.
    26. Here, a grievous dangerous sickness.
    27. Here, he will fall from that sickness into another sickness.
    28. Here, danger before the 21st day.
    29. Here, he will gradually get better slowly.
    30. Here, a troublesome sickness, but with good attendance he will be well shortly.
  15. PROFITABLE AND CHRISTIAN ADVICE FIT TO BE TAKEN.
    Every time things which are stolen, or lost, or go astray, cannot be discovered naturally by the virtues of the stars, and further, when a sickness is hurtful so that it is not known what its end may be, it is a good thing to put the matter before God and His saints; because God has given power to them to counteract natural working, and to show things which are lost or stolen, and such like; as has often been shown through the intercession of the famous saint, Antony of Padua, of the Order of S. Francis, to every good Christian who has prayed to Him earnestly and with good faith, with the Responsorium, and with this collect which the whole Church uses, viz., Si quaeris miracula, mors, error, calamitas, daemon lepra fugiunt, aegri surgunt sani, &c.  Ora pro nobis B. Antonni, ut digni &c.  Oremus:  Ecclesiam tuam Deus B. Antonii &c.  And I say the truth to the glory of God and in honor of the saint, that it has often happened to myself to find things which were lost, through the virtue of that devotion.  And let every person who hears me believe, for in case that the things which are lost are not found immediately, nevertheless let him have firm hope that they will be found, if it be expedient for him.  Accordingly let no one leave off saying it frequently.  I said, if it be expedient for him; for although we know the things we ask, still we do not know if it is good for us to get them; but it is certain that God knows best the things which are expedient for us; accordingly, at times, the things which we ask, [and which appear to us to be good], God does not give to us, because they are bad for our souls; although we think that they are good for our bodies, for it is to that we mostly look.  This is evident from what happened to a lady in the city of Valencia who suffered painfully a long time from a disease called cancer.  She made a devotion of nine days to the blessed saint San Luis Beltran, of the Order of S. Dominic, that she might get her health from God.  At the end of the nine days she was whole.  After that she heard from a preacher that an important way to secure eternal glory was to be under labor, hardship and pains in this world for God’s sake.  Accordingly she began to make the same devotion to the same saint, praying him, if that would be an occasion to get glory, to send her the same disease again.  She got her request, and in a short time she went to possess glory.  But let us return to our conversation.  It is not only that this Responsorium of S. Antony serves to get back things which are lost or stolen, but in addition, it helps to save a man from misery and poverty.  it is, further, mighty against the Devil, saves one from wandering of way or mind, from death, leprosy and other diseases, from necessities and from many evils.  through this Responsorium victory is given over winds and storms by sea and land, and further, the limbs of people who are crippled from disease are loosed miraculously.  Give heed to this wonder, which is unusual, viz., that the Church gives permission to every man to ask miracles of God through this Responsorium, as the first three words say, saying Si quaeris miracula.  We have purposely treated of it so that anyone who shall lose or have things stolen from him, may not offer to trouble the astronomers to give them knowledge, or to erect a figure by their art to show that; because they are unprofitable; and, further, it is a cause of suspicions, contentions, evil reputation, as the astronomers admit themselves, and as experience proves for us, I myself also being a witness to that.
  THE EIGHTH CHAPTER.
  1. CONCERNING OTHER WONDERS OF THE MOON, AS REGARDS THE SIGNS AND FIRST THUNDER OF THE YEAR.
    If the first thunder of the year happens when the moon is in the sign Aries, the herbs and grass will be plentiful.  If it is in Taurus the moon is at the first thunder, the hills will be more fruitful than the lowlands, and the dry ground better than the wet ground, and the sheep and the wine will be plentiful.  If it is in Gemini the moon is at that time, bread and water and hail and peas will be plentiful, but the birds will not be so.  If it is in Cancer it is, there will be famine and commotion in the villages under the dominion of that sign, and worms will do damage to the corn and the fruit in the lowlands, and water will be plentiful.  If it is in Leo, there will be strife between kings, living will be dear, and important personages will die that year.  If it is in Virgo, enemies and spies will be plentiful, and many of the large cattle will die.  If it is in Libra, the beginning of the year will be dry, and its end wet, and food will be dear.  If it is in Scorpio, wine will be plentiful, many of the fish and sheep will die, and the women will lose children dead before their birth, and powerful and mighty winds will not be lacking that year.  If it is in Sagittarius it is, water will be moderate and profitable, fruit scarce, divisions plentiful between the people of one house and one village.  If it is in Capricorn the moon is, the people will be melancholy, and there will be plagues in the countries which are under the dominion of that sign.  If it is in Aquarius it is, the water will be plentiful, there will be trouble and terror in the villages, and evil unhealthy winds.  If it is in Pisces the moon is at the first thunder of the year, the weather will be very dry, and there will be great frost in its own time, wine will be plentiful, fruit scarce, and sickness harmless.  Be it noted that it is in the countries which are under the dominion of the sign in which the moon is at the first thunder that these things will happen more especially.
  2. INSTRUCTION PROFITABLE TO WORKING PEOPLE.
    That the husbandman may have full fruit as regards his labor, let him take care to sow the seed and the spores at the crescent of the moon, and when it is in the sign of Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Libra and Capricorn, and he will see wonderful fruit by reason of that.
  3. CURIOUS SECRET RECOMMENDED TO WORKING PEOPLE.
    That is may be known from year to year which of the grains will be most plentiful and profitable . . . . a certain author writes, as Samoranus says in his book . . asking to sow three or four grains of each kind of grain, in a good and wet ground, a month before the dog days, and the grain which shows itself best on the first day of the dog days, that is the best to sow, and will be most plentiful the coming year; and the grain which shows itself worst and grows most withered on the same day, will have least fruit that year.