  Original letters relative to the English reformation. Written during the reigns of King Henry viii., King Edward vi., and Queen Mary: chiefly from the archives of Zurich. Translated from authenticated copies of the autographs.

  EDWARD VI. TO THE SENATE OF ZURICH.
  Westminster
  Oct. 20, 1549
    Edward the sixth, by the grace of God, of England, France, and Ireland, king, defender of the Faith, and of the church of England and Ireland supreme head upon earth, &c.  To the honorable and valiant Lords of Zurich, our right entirely beloved friends, greeting.  After we had taken upon ourselves, by ancient and hereditary right, the government of our kingdoms, nothing was more ardently desired by us than to conciliate, and most firmly retain, the friendship of those sovereigns who had been especially esteemed by our most serene father of most happy memory:  and as in the number of these he always regarded, as long as he lived, your most noble and valiant nation; so we likewise cannot but regard you with especial esteem, and exceedingly value your friendship; and the rather, because we have understood by the frequent letters of our faithful and beloved servant, Christopher Mont, both your favorable disposition towards us, and ready inclination to deserve well of us.  In addition to which, there is also a mutual agreement between us concerning the Christian religion and true godliness, which ought to render this friendship of ours, by God’s blessing, yet more intimate.  We therefore return you our warmest thanks for your singular and favorable disposition towards us, which you shall always find to be reciprocal on our part, whenever an opportunity shall present itself.  We have therefore commanded this our servant to salute you most cordially, to inform you more fully of our affection and good-will, and to lay before you, in our name, some other things which we have thought fit should at this time be made known to you.  We therefore earnestly request you to place assured and undoubting reliance upon what he shall communicate.  So farewell.  From our palace at Westminster, Oct. 20, A.D. 1549, and of our reign the third.
              Your good friend,
                  EDWARD.
citation: 

  LADY JANE SEYMOUR TO BUCER AND FAGIUS.
  Sion
  June 12, 1549
    I have perused your letter, most reverend fathers, which has not only pleased, but highly delighted me.  For I easily perceived therein your singular good-will towards me, a grace and eloquence equal to that of Cicero, together with a most abiding remembrance of me, which, as it is in most persons of very rare occurrence, I cannot sufficiently admire in you.  But when I consider in what way I can recompense the sincerity of your friendship, I plainly perceive that this is quite out of my power; and that I can only offer you, as I shall do as long as I live, my warmest acknowledgments.  I dare not presume to write to you how very acceptable were the books that you presented to my sister and myself, for fear lest my ineloquent commendation of them may appear impertinent.  From your exceeding praise of the addresses of myself and my sister, which we might more truly be said to babble than to recite before you, I perceive your incomparable benevolence and friendship, abounding in such kind exaggeration respecting us.  For neither my sister nor myself assume to ourselves a single atom of this commendation, nor have we any right to do so.  My mother, thank God, is in good health:  she desires her best respects to you both, and also thanks you for your salutations to her grace.  Farewell, both of you, and may your life long be preserved!  Sion, June 12, 1549
              Your attached well wisher,
                  JANE SEYMOUR.

  HENRY, DUKE OF SUFFOLK, TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  London
  Dec. 21, 1551
    That you have not received, my very dear Bullinger, any letter from me before now, by which I might testify towards you that good-will which you have on so many accounts deserved, and also thank you most heartily for your exceeding courtesy to me, which I most entirely appreciate, has been solely attributable to those affairs of state, upon which I had to bestow all my zeal, labor, and diligence, unless I would fail in satisfying my duty to God, my own dignity, and the expectation of the public.  You will therefore, I know, easily pardon my delay, especially as I would have you assured that my regard for you can be diminished by no circumstances, and much less by time.  For the book which you have published under the auspices of my name, I return you, not only for my own sake, but for that of the whole church of Christ, the thanks I ought; and I acknowledge the divine goodness towards his church, and, as Paul expresses it, the love of God to man, that he has chosen to adorn and illuminate his church with such lights, as that we who are less enlightened, may follow those guides in the beaten path of true religion, who may both be able, by reason of the gifts they have received from God, and willing, by reason of their affection to their brethren, diligently to point out the way in which we ought to walk.  It would indeed have been all over with us, had not he provided pillars of this kind to support his church, which otherwise would beyond all doubt have been overthrown.
    I acknowledge myself also to be much indebted to you on my daughter’s account, for having always exhorted her in your godly letters to a true faith in Christ, the study of the scriptures, purity of manners, and innocence of life; and I earnestly request you to continue these exhortations as frequently as possible.  Farewell, most accomplished Bullinger, and may Almighty God prosper your endeavors in the church, and evermore defend you!  From my house in London.  Dec. 21, 1551
          HENRY, DUKE OF SUFFOLK.

  LADY JANE GREAY TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  Bradgate
  July 12, 1551
    I give you, most learned sir, unceasing thanks, and shall do so as long as I live, for I cannot engage to requite the obligation; as I seem to myself quite unable to make a suitable return for such exceeding courtesy, unless indeed you should be of opinion that I return a favor while I retain it in my remembrance.  Nor are these professions made without reason.  For I have received from you a most weighty and eloquent epistle, which was indeed very gratifying to me, not only because, to the neglect of more important engagements, you have condescended to write from so distant a country, and in your declining age, to me, who am unworthy of the correspondence of so distinguished a personage; but also because your writings are of such a character, as that they contain, not mere ordinary topics for amusement, but pious and divine thought for instruction, admonition and counsel, on such points especially, as are suited to my age and sex and the dignity of my family.  In this epistle, as in everything else that you have published to the great edification of the Christian commonwealth, you have shown yourself not only a man of exquisite learning and singular acquirement, but also a skillful, prudent, and godly counselor; one who can relish nothing that is not excellent, think nothing that is not divine, enjoin nothing that is not profitable, and produce nothing that is not virtuous, pious, and worthy of so reverend a father.  Oh! happy me, to be possessed of such a friend and so wise a counselor! (for, as Solomon says, “in the multitude of counselors there is safety;”) and to be connected by the ties of friendship and intimacy with so learned a man, so pious a divine, and so intrepid a champion of true religion!  On many accounts I consider myself beholden to Almighty God; but especially for having, after I was bereaved of the pious Bucer, that most learned man and holy father, who unweariedly did not cease, day and night, and to the utmost of his ability, to supply me with all necessary instructions and directions for my conduct in life; and who by his excellent advice promoted and encouraged my progress and advancement in all virtue, godliness, and learning; for having, I say, afforded me in his place a man so worthy to be reverenced as yourself, and who, I hope, will continue, as you have begun, to spur me on, when I loiter and am inclined to delay.  For no better fortune can await me than to be thought worthy of the correspondence and most wholesome admonitions of men so renowned, whose virtues cannot be sufficiently eulogized; and to experience the same happiness as was enjoyed by Blesilla, Paula, and Eustochium, to whom, as it is recorded, Saint Jerome imparted instruction, and brought them by his discourses to the knowledge of divine truths; or, the happiness of that venerable matron, to whom St. John addressed an exhortatory and evangelical epistle; or that, lastly, of the mother of Severus, who profited by the counsels of Origen, and was obedient to his precepts.  All which personages were less indebted for their renown and celebrity to their beauty of person, nobility of birth, and large possessions, than to the glory and happiness they derived from the instructions of wise men, who, though singularly eminent for erudition and piety, did not disdain to lead them, as it were, by the hand to every thing excellent, and to suggest to them such thoughts as might especially conduce to their eternal salvation and happiness in the life to come.  And I request again and again, that as you cannot be deemed inferior to any of these in understanding, or learning, or godliness, you will condescend to manifest a like kindness to myself.  My unreserved requests may carry with them an appearance of boldness; but if you will consider the motive by which I am actuated, namely, that I may draw forth from the storehouse of your piety such instruction as may tend both to direct my conduct, and confirm my faith in Christ my Savior, your goodness cannot, and your wisdom will now, allow you to censure them.
    From that little volume of pure and unsophisticated religion, which you lately sent to my father and myself, I gather daily, as out of a most beautiful garden, the sweetest flowers.  My father also, as far as his weighty engagements permit, is diligently occupied in the perusal of it:  but whatever advantage either of us may derive from thence, we are bound to render thanks to you for it, and to God on your account; for we cannot think it right to receive with ungrateful minds such and so many truly divine benefits, conferred by Almighty God through the instrumentality of yourself and those like you, not a few of whom Germany is now in this respect so happy as to possess.  If it be customary with mankind, as indeed it ought to be, to return favor for favor, and to show ourselves mindful of benefits bestowed; how much rather should we endeavor to embrace with joyfulness the benefits conferred by divine goodness, and at least to acknowledge them with our gratitude, though we may be unable to make an adequate return!
    I now come to that part of your letter which contains a commendation of myself, which as I cannot claim, so also I ought not to allow:  but whatever the divine goodness may have bestowed upon me, I ascribe solely to himself, as the chief and sole author of any thing in me that bears any semblance of what is good; and to whom I entreat you, most accomplished sir, to offer your constant prayers on my behalf, that he may so direct me and all my actions, that I may not be found unworthy of his so great goodness.  My most noble father would have written to you, to thank you both for the important labors in which you are engaged, and also for the singular courtesy you have manifested by inscribing with his name and publishing under his auspices your fifth Decade, had he not been summoned by most weighty business in his majesty’s service to the remotest parts of Britain; but as soon as public affairs shall afford him leisure, he is determined, he says, to write to you with all diligence.  To conclude, as I am now beginning to learn Hebrew, if you will point out some way and method of pursuing this study to the greatest advantage, you will confer on me a very great obligation.
    Farewell, brightest ornament and support of the whole church of Christ; and may Almighty God long preserve you to us and to his church!
                Your most devoted,
                    JANE GREY.

  LADY JANE GREY TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Irish  Bradgate
  July 7, 1552
    I should seem altogether ungrateful, unmindful of my duty, and unworthy of your favors, could I do otherwise than thank you, most accomplished sir, for your many acts of kindness to myself.  I do this however with diffidence, inasmuch as the great friendship which you desire to exist between us, and the many favors you have conferred upon one who is so entirely undeserving of them, seem to demand something more than mere thanks; and I cannot satisfactorily repay by my poor and worthless correspondence the debt of gratitude I owe you.  The consideration also of my unfitness to address a letter to a person of your eminence, greatly adds to my uncomfortable feelings; nor indeed should I either desire or presume to disturb your important labors with my trifles and puerilities, or interrupt your eloquence by my so great rudeness of speech, only that I know I have no other means of testifying my gratitude, and that I have no doubt of your accustomed and long experienced indulgence.
    With respect to the  lately received from you, you must know, that after having read it twice over, (for one perusal did not satisfy me,) I seemed to have derived as much benefit from your excellent and truly divine precepts, as I have scarcely obtained from the daily perusal of the best authors.  You exhort me to embrace a genuine and sincere faith in Christ my Savor.  I will endeavor to satisfy you in this request, as far as God shall enable me to do; but as I acknowledge faith to be his gift, I ought therefore only to promise so far as he may see fit to bestow it upon me.  I shall not however cease to pray, with the apostles, that he may of his goodness daily increase it in me.  And to this I will add, as you exhort me, and with the divine blessing, such holiness of life, as my (alas!) too feeble powers may enable me to practice.  Do you, meanwhile, with your wonted kindness, make daily mention of me in your prayers.  In the study of Hebrew I shall pursue that method which you so clearly point out.  Farewell, and may God protect you in the task you have undertaken, and prosper you for evermore!
              Your most religiously obedient,
                    JANE GREY.

  LADY JANE GREY TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  Bradgate
  June 1553
    The tardy performance of a duty, most learned sir, ought not to be censured, especially if it has not been omitted through neglect.  The truth is, I am at a great distance from you, the couriers are few, and news reaches me slowly: but as I can now avail myself of the messenger, by whom my letters to you, and yours to me, have usually been conveyed, I must not be wanting in my duty of writing to you, but as diligently as possible, by word and deed, discharge the obligation.  For so great is your authority with all men, so great, as I hear, is the solidity of your preaching, so great too is the integrity of your conduct, according to the report of those who know you, that foreign and remote nations, as well as your own countrymen, are excited not only by your words, but by your actions, to follow after a good and happy life.  For you are not only, as St. James says, a diligent herald and preacher of the gospel, and of the holy commands of God, but also a true observer and doer of them; and you manifest in your own life the practice that your precepts enjoin, not deceiving yourself.  Neither, indeed, do you resemble those who behold their natural face in a glass, and, as soon as they have gone away, forget the form of it; but you preach true and sound doctrine, and by your manner of life afford an example and pattern for others to follow what you both enjoin and practice.  But why do I thus address your gravity, when my ignorance is such that I can neither adequately praise your piety, nor sufficiently eulogize your integrity of life, nor set forth your profound and admirable learning in a becoming manner?  Were I indeed to extol you as truth requires, I should need either the oratorical powers of Demosthenes, or the eloquence of Cicero; for your merits are so great, as to demand not only length of time, but an acuteness of intellect and elegance of expression far beyond that of my age to set them forth.  For God, it seems, has looked upon you with such complacency, as to have fitted you both for his kingdom and for this world:  for in this earthly prison you pass your days, as though you were dead; whereas you live, and this not only to Christ in the first place, without whom there can be no life, and in the next place to yourself; but also to others without number, whom you strenuously labor and assiduously endeavor to bring, by God’s blessing, to that immortality which, when you shall have departed this life, you will obtain yourself.  And that your piety may accomplish what you desire, I will not cease to implore of God, the supreme ruler of the universe, nor constantly to importune the divine ears for your long continuance in this life.
    In writing to you in this manner I have exhibited more boldness than prudence:  but so great has been your kindness towards me, in condescending to write to me, a stranger, and in supplying the necessary instruction for the adornment of my understanding and the improvement of my mind, that I should justly appear chargeable with neglect and forgetfulness of duty, were I not to show myself mindful of you and of your deservings in every possible way.  Besides, I entertain the hope that you will excuse the more than feminine boldness of me, who, girlish and unlearned as I am, presume to write to a man who is the father of learning; and that you will pardon that rudeness which has made me not hesitate to interrupt your more important occupations with my vain trifles and puerile correspondence.  Let me but obtain your indulgence, and I shall consider myself on every account exceedingly indebted to your kindness.  For if I have been to blame in this matter, you must ascribe it rather to the excess of my regard for you and for your virtues, than either to a boldness which ought not at all to exist in our sex, or a temerity which is for the most part adverse to our better judgment; inasmuch as the splendor of your endowments is so dazzling to my mental perception, whenever I read your works or meditate upon yourself, that I do not consider what is becoming to my condition, but what is due to your worth and excellence.  My mind, moreover, is fluctuating and undecided:  for while I consider my age, sex, and mediocrity, or rather infancy in learning, each of these things, much more all of them, deter me from writing; but when I call to mind the eminence of your virtues, the celebrity of your character, and the magnitude of your favors towards me, the higher consideration yields to the inferior; a sense of what is becoming me gives way to your worth, and the respect which your merits demand usually prevails over all other considerations.
    It now only remains for me, most illustrious sir, earnestly to entreat you cordially to salute in my name, though I am personally unacquainted with him, the excellent Bibliander, that pattern of erudition, godliness, and authority.  For so great is the reputation of his learning in our country, and so renowned his name among all people, by reason of the singular endowments which God has bestowed upon him, that though I have acquired but little learning myself, I cannot resist my inclination to pay respect to the piety and integrity of such a man, who, if I am not mistaken, has been sent to us from heaven.  And I pray God that such pillars of the church as you both are, may long enjoy good health.  As long as I shall be permitted to live, I shall not cease to offer you my good wishes, to thank you for the kindness you have showed me, and to pray for your welfare.  Farewell, learned sir.
              Your piety’s most devoted,
                    JANE GREY.

  ARCHBISHOP CRANMER TO JOACHIM VADIAN.
  unknown
  1537
    Having obtained a release, or rather a respite, from public affairs and deliberations, and beginning, illustrious and most learned Vadian, at the turn of the year, to reply to you among my other learned correspondents, to whose letters I had long been owing an answer, (to you, I say, as having received your letter last winter, together with a literary present, which kind of presents I always regard as of the greatest value,) I first begin to consider with myself, and entertain some apprehension, lest by my so long protracted silence I may have given occasion in your mind to some suspicion or opinion not altogether favorable to me.  For I know that it is usual among the generality of mankind, that when one person sends his commendations to another, he anxiously expects an acknowledgement of them by the very first opportunity: and if this be delayed, he will suspect that it has been owing to pride, or neglect, or at least forgetfulness; and will conclude beforehand that the party will continue such through the whole of his life, as he has been found to be upon a first introduction.  Whereas the person who sends a speedy reply, is judged to have done so from kind and friendly motives, and is therefore regarded as courteous, accessible, and grateful; he on the other hand, who is tardy in his acknowledgments, is considered hard of access, and a person of rude and disagreeable manners.  So true it is, that whatever a man does quickly and without delay, he may be said to do twice over.  But I promise myself a far better reception from your more than ordinary discretion and courtesy, and am confident that you will take in good part this my involuntary tardiness or delay, and not ascribe it so much to my manners as to my engagements.  The nature and importance of thee has, I think, long since been made known to you be report; and I have written something respecting them to our common friend Grynaeus, who will, I doubt not, as the rights of friendship require, make you acquainted with every circumstance.  To him therefore I refer you, in case you are offended with me in this matter, as to one who will render me more excusable in your eyes.
    I perceive in your letter, and readily accept and embrace, your good-will towards me, and inclination to cultivate a more intimate friendship with me.  For I consider you as one who, by reason of your extraordinary erudition, (by which I shall not scruple to acknowledge that I have myself derived benefits,) and of your probity of morals, confirmed by the testimony of many most excellent persons, is worthy of being regarded by me with all love, favor, and respect.  Nevertheless, if I may candidly express my sentiments, (as ought to be the case between good men,) the subject you treat of in those six books which you sent me as a present, is altogether displeasing to me; and I could wish you had bestowed your labors to better purpose, and commenced an agreeable friendship with myself under better, or at least more approved auspices.  For, unless I see stronger evidence brought forward than I have yet been able to see, I desire neither to be the patron nor the approver of the opinion maintained by you.  And I am plainly convinced, and from this circumstance especially, that the cause is not a good one, because you who are so shrewd, so eloquent, and so perfectly accomplished in all arts and learning, do not seem to defend and support it with sufficient vigor.  I have seen almost every thing that has been written and published either by Œcolampadius or Zuinglius, and I have come to the conclusion that the writings of every man must be read with discrimination.  And perhaps one might apply to these men, and not without reason, the remark of Jerome respecting Origen, that where they wrote well, nobody wrote better, &c.: you know what follows.  As far indeed as they have endeavored to point out, confute, and correct papistical and sophistical errors and abuses, I commend and approve them.  And I wish that they had confined themselves within those limits, and not trodden down the wheat together with the tares; that is, had not at the same time done violence to the authority of the ancient doctors and chief writers in the church of Christ.  For how much soever you may exercise your ingenuity, you will certainly never convince me, nor, I think, any unprejudiced reader, that those ancient authors are on your side in this controversy.  You have been, in fact, more than enough inquisitive in your investigation of errors; and while you are endeavoring to purify every thing, you have fancied error to lurk in places where none existed.  And this error most certainly, if error it be, has been handed down to us by the fathers themselves, and men of apostolical character, from the very beginning of the church.  And what godly man could endure to hear this, much less to believe it?  Not to mention in the mean time, that our gracious Lord would never have left his beloved spouse in such lamentable blindness for so long a period.
    Wherefore, since this catholic faith which we hold respecting the real presence has been declared to the church from the beginning by such evident and manifest passages of scripture, and the same has also been subsequently commended to the ears of the faithful with so much clearness and diligence by the first ecclesiastical writers; do not, I pray, persist in wishing any longer to carp at or subvert a doctrine so well grounded and supported.  You have sufficiently made the attempt already.  And unless it had been firmly founded upon a solid rock, it would long since have fallen with the crash of a mighty ruin.  It cannot be told, how greatly this so bloody controversy has impeded the full course of the gospel both throughout the whole Christian world, and especially among ourselves.  it brings very great danger to yourselves, and occasions to all others a stumbling-block greater than I can express.  Wherefore, if you will listen to me, I exhort and advise you, yea, I beg, beseech, and implore and adjure you in the bowels of Jesus Christ, to agree and unite in a Christian concord, to exert your whole strength in establishing it, and at length to afford to the churches the peace of God which passes all understanding, so that we may, with united strength, extend as widely as possible one sound, pure, evangelical doctrine, conformable to the discipline of the primitive church.  We should easily convert even the Turks to the obedience of our gospel, if only we would agree among ourselves, and unite together in some holy confederacy.  But if we go on in this way to “bite and devour each other,” there will be reason to fear, lest (what I abhor the mention of), according to the warning of the apostle, we “be consumed one of another.”
    You have, worthy Vadian, my true and genuine opinion respecting that entire controversy, together with a free and faithful admonition.  To which if you will pay attention, I shall enroll your name not only among my friends, but among my best friends.  Farewell,  [1537]
                T. CANTUAR.

  ARCHBISHOP CRANMER TO WOLFGANG CAPITO.
  unknown
  unknown
    The treatise, my friend Capito, which you had dedicated to the king’s majesty, I presented to him with my own hand.  He received it, as I thought, with pleasure and satisfaction.  I also hinted to him that he should recompense your labors, and he promised to see to it.  Not long after, when the bishop of Hereford and I were together in company with the Lord Crumwell, the keeper of the privy seal, who is one of the privy councilors, and who has himself done more than all others together in whatever has hitherto been effected respecting the reformation of religion and of the clergy; we united in requesting him to put his majesty again in mind of you, which he has done, and a hundred crowns are assigned to you as a present, which he has ordered the bearer of this letter to take with him.  Do you still desire to know whether your offering was acceptable?  Well, I will state, not what I myself know to be the fact, but what I have heard from others who have been at court more recently than myself.  The king, who is a most acute and vigilant observer, is wont to hand over books of this kind that have been presented to him, and those especially which he has not the patience to read himself, to one of his lords in waiting for perusal, from whom he may afterwards learn their contents.  He then takes them back, and presently gives them to be examined by some one else, of an entirely opposite way of thinking to the former party.  When he has thus made himself master of their opinions, and sufficiently ascertained both what they commend and what they find fault with, he at length openly declares his own judgment respecting the same points.  And this, I understand, he has done with respect to your book; and while he was much pleased with many things in it, there were also some things which he could by no means digest or approve.  I suspect they were the statements you  made concerning the mass.  You now have every thing respecting that book which I have been able either to hear and see in person, or to gather and collect, when absent, from the report of others.  As to myself, be assured of this, that I love and reverence you from my heart, and regard you as one who, by reason of your remarkable erudition united to an equal integrity of manners, is deserving of the friendly offices of all good men.  And I wish that my ability corresponded with my inclination to serve you; for you should then perceive, my Capito, how greatly I esteem you.  I request you in the mean time to take in good part from me this trifling present, small indeed, if your deserts are taken into account, but yet not to be despised, if you duly consider, either the feelings of the giver, or the necessary and manifold expenses with which I am burdened almost beyond my strength.  In fine, I request you to favor and assist for my sake, as far as you can, this my friend Thomas Tybald, who is the bearer of this letter.  Farewell.
                      T. CANTUAR.

  ARCHBISHOP CRANMER TO JOHN A LASCO.
  London
  July 4, 1548
    I am sorry that your coming to us has been prevented by the unlooked for intervention of some other engagement; for I have no doubt but that I should easily have satisfied you as to your invitation, if I had had an opportunity of conversing with you upon the subject.  But as you are not able to come at present, but write word that you intend to come at some future time, if you shall have previously been informed by a letter from me as to the nature of your vocation amongst us; I will converse with you by letter, and briefly explain in writing, what I shall perhaps state somewhat more copiously to you in person.  We are desirous of setting forth in our churches the true doctrine of God, and have no wish to adapt it to all tastes, or to deal in ambiguities; but, laying aside all carnal considerations, to transmit to posterity a true and explicit form of doctrine agreeable to the rule of the sacred writings; so that there may not only be set forth among all nations an illustrious testimony respecting our doctrine, delivered by the grave authority of learned and godly men, but that all posterity may have a pattern to imitate.  For the purpose of carrying this important design into execution we have thought it necessary to have the assistance of learned men, who, having compared their opinions together with us, may do away with all doctrine.  We have therefore invited both yourself and some other learned men; and as they have come over to us without any reluctance, so that we scarcely have to regret the absence of any of them, with the exception of yourself and Melancthon, we earnestly request you, both to come yourself, and, if possible, to bring Melancthon along with you.  I am now sending a third letter to Melancthon, in which I exhort him to come to us; and if your exhortation be added to my letter, I have no doubt but that he will be persuaded to accept an invitation so often repeated.  He need not, I think, be under any fear of the attacks of enemies, or the dangers of the roads, which, if they exist at all, are however far less than where he now is.  You  may add too, that by undergoing a little inconvenience for a short time, he will procure to himself ease for many years, and to the state everlasting benefit.  If I anticipated that his visit to us would be either useless or unpleasant, no one would dissuade him from it more earnestly than myself.  But now, when I perceive that he can in nowise act more advantageously either for himself or for the state, than by coming over to us at this juncture, I am the more urgent upon the subject, and exhort you to exert all your diligence and consideration to this one end, namely, to make our friend Philip ours in reality.  I explained to you, a short time since, what will be the situation of you both; but I so explained it, as desiring that you should learn to be pleased with England from your own experience rather than by my commendation of it.  Farewell and happily.  London, July 4, 1548
    I am exceedingly desirous of your presence.
                T. CANTUAR.

  ARCHBISHOP CRANMER TO ALBERT HARDENBERG.
  Cambridge
  July 28, 1548
    But if our friend Philip will consider for what purpose he is invited, and also by what persons, those, assuredly, who are most friendly both to himself and to true religion; and also with how great anxiety he is both invited and expected; truly I know not whether he can neglect this summons, especially as he must perceive that he has no certain vocation yonder which he can properly place in opposition to it.  If he felt unwilling to refuse the venerable elector of Cologne upon a like invitation, he cannot certainly decline the present one, upon an occasion of much greater importance and necessity.  His friends perhaps will be unwilling to let him go, and he too will be unwilling to part with his friends at this particular juncture: but I fear in the mean time that all parties yonder do not attend to him from such motives as we could wish; and even if they do, I know not whether he can now remain there with as much advantage as can now be derived from his presence in our England, and which nevertheless ought not to be disregarded by us, inasmuch as we think it our duty to seek truly and heartily the glory of Christ our Lord.  I wish he would once make up his mind, and acquaint us with his intention, or that he would come over to us immediately, and anticipate every messenger.  We will provide for the expense, either through you, or elsewhere, as soon as we know to what extent, and in what place, he wishes provision to be made.  Cambridge, July 28, 1548

  ARCHBISHOP CRANMER TO MARTIN BUCER.
  London
  Oct. 2, 1548
    Grace and peace of God in Christ.  I have read your letter to John Hales, in which you relate the miserable condition of Germany, and inform us that you can scarcely preside in the ministry of the word in your city.  With groanings therefore I call out with the prophet, “Shew thy marvelous loving-kindness, O thou that savest them which trust in thee from those that rise up against thy right hand.” (Ps. xvii. 7, marg. ver.)  Nor do I doubt but that God will regard both this and the like lamentations of godly men; and that he will preserve and defend the true doctrine, which has hitherto been sincerely set forth in your churches, against all the rage of the devil and of the world.  Those, in the mean time, who are unable amidst the raging storm to launch out into the deep, must take refuge in harbor.  To you, therefore, My Bucer, our kingdom will be a most safe harbor, in which, by the blessing of God, the seeds of true doctrine have happily begun to be sown.  Come over therefore to us, and become a laborer with us in the harvest of the Lord.  You will not be of less benefit to the universal church of God while you are with us, than if you retain your former position.  In addition to this, you will be better able to heal the wounds of your distressed country in your absence, than you are now able to do in person.  Laying aside therefore all delay, come over to us as soon as possible.  We will make it manifest that nothing can be more gratifying or agreeable to us than the presence of Bucer.  But take care that you suffer no inconvenience from the journey.  You are aware of those who pursue your life: do not therefore commit yourself into their hands.  There is an English merchant yonder, Richard Hilles, a godly and most trustworthy man, with whom I would have you confer respecting all the arrangements for your journey.  Moreover, I pray God, the eternal Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, with my whole heart, that in the midst of wrath he may remember mercy, and look upon the calamities of his afflicted church, and kindle the light of true doctrine increasingly among us, and not suffer it to be extinguished, after having now shone with so much splendor for many years among yourselves.  May he likewise, my Bucer, guide and preserve you, and bring you over to us in safety.  Farewell and happily.  London, Oct 2, 1548  Most anxious for your arrival,
      THOMAS CRANMER, archbishop of Canterbury.

  ARCHBISHOP CRANMER TO PHILIP MELANCTHON.
  London
  Feb. 10, 1549
    We are experiencing, most learned Melancthon, the truth of all that our Lord Jesus Christ has foretold respecting the trials of his church.  “But God is faithful, who will not suffer his people to be tempted above that they are able, but will also with the temptation make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it.”  For though from his hatred to the Son of God the devil exercises a horrible tyranny over the members of Christ, yet God has promised that his church shall never perish; nay, of these last times he expressly declares, “To hoar hairs will I carry her; I will bear, I will deliver her.”  And God has always willed some civil societies to be the refuge of his churches, and that their rulers should support the friends of heavenly doctrine; just as Obadiah befriended the hearers of Elias, whom the kings of Israel were persecuting on every side.  Wherefore, eternal Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, I give thee thanks for having rescued our island from the waves, like the ark of Noah, and for having granted us such rulers as seek thy glory, and who devote their houses and possessions to the church and its service, as in old time the cottage of the widow of Sarepta afforded a home to Elias.  And I pray God to direct us, and to gather unto himself a perpetual church amongst us, not only out of our own countrymen, but also from among those of foreign nations, as according to his infinite mercy he has already begun to do.  For many pious and learned men have come over to us, some from Italy, some from Germany, and we are daily expecting more; which society of the church if you will vouchsafe to increase and adorn with your presence, I know not by what means you will be able more effectually to set forth the glory of God.
    I am aware that you have often desired that wise and godly men should take counsel together, and, having compared their opinions, send forth under the sanction of their authority some work, that should embrace the chief subjects of ecclesiastical doctrine, and transmit the truth uncorrupted to posterity.  This object we are anxiously endeavoring to accomplish to the utmost of our power.  We therefore request you to communicate your counsel and opinions with us in person, and not so to shut up your mind as to seem wanting even to your own wishes, or acting in opposition to so manifest a calling of God.  I could relate many things upon this subject, which would bring you over to our opinion; but the brevity of a letter will not contain them all.  I would rather, therefore, that you should learn them from the bearer, John a Lasco, a most excellent man.  For he has resided with me upon the most intimate and friendly terms for some months past; and I pray you to give credit to whatever he may relate to you in my name.  May our Lord Jesus Christ, the guardian of his church, who has said, None shall pluck my sheep out of my hands, preserve and defend the ministry of his gospel, and bring you in safety to the harbor of our church!  Farewell.  London, Feb. 10, 1549
            Most anxious for your arrival,
                  THOMAS CANTUAR.
    Our German friends who are with us, request you to bring with you doctor Albert Hardenberg, as Jonas will tell you in my name.

  ARCHBISHOP CRANMER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  Lambeth
  March 20, 1552
    Much health.  That I reply, after a year’s interval, to your letter Zurich on the 14th of February, you must impute partly to my want of leisure, and partly to a kind of dislike to a duty of this nature, and which I must candidly admit myself to entertain.  But as it is better to perform a duty tardily than not at all, you shall now receive a reply to the whole of your letter.
    You write to me upon two subjects, one of a public, the other of a private nature.  With respect to that which is public, name, that I would advise the king’s majesty not to send any delegate to the council of Trent, there was no need of any advice of mine to dissuade him from a measure which never came into his mind: but I considered it better, forasmuch as our adversaries are now holding their councils at Trent to confirm their errors, to recommend his majesty to grant his assistance, that in England, or elsewhere, there might be convoked a synod of the most learned and excellent persons, in which provision might be made for the purity of ecclesiastical doctrine, and especially for an agreement upon the sacramentarian controversy.  To which plan (as considering it most useful to the Christian commonwealth) I perceived that the mind of his majesty was very favorably disposed.  We must not therefore suffer ourselves to be wanting to the church of God in a matter of such importance.  I have written upon the subject to masters Philip [Melancthon] and Calvin; and I pray you to devise the means by which this synod may be assembled with the greatest convenience, either in England or elsewhere.
    The private affair upon which you wrote to me, was, that I should put an end to the controversy between the bishop of London and Hooper, bishop of Gloucester, respecting which it is now too late to reply.  For I am aware that you have been informed long since, that this controversy has been entirely settled.  And master Hooper is in such great esteem among us, that he is now appointed bishop of Worcester, and is at this time living in my house upon the most intimate terms, during the sitting of parliament.  May the Lord Jesus guide and defend you by his holy Sprit!  Farewell.  Lambeth, March 20, 1552
                Your reverence’s most attached,
                  THOMAS CANTUAR.

  ARCHBISHOP CRANMER TO JOHN CALVIN.
  Lambeth
  March 20, 1552
    Much health.  As nothing tends more injuriously to the separation of the churches than heresies and disputes respecting the doctrines of religion, so nothing tends more effectually to unite the churches of God, and more powerfully to defend the fold of Christ, than the pure teaching of the gospel, and harmony of doctrine.  Wherefore I have often wished, and still continue to do so, that learned and godly men, who are eminent for erudition and judgment, might meet together in some place of safety, where by taking counsel together, and comparing their respective opinions, they might handle all the heads of ecclesiastical doctrine, and hand down to posterity, under the weight of their authority, some work not only upon the subjects themselves, but upon the forms of expressing them.  Our adversaries are now holding their councils at Trent for the establishment of their errors; and shall we neglect to call together a godly synod, for the refutation of error, and for restoring and propagating the truth?  They are, as I am informed, making decrees respecting the worship of the host: wherefore we ought to leave no stone unturned, not only that we may guard others against this idolatry, but also that we may ourselves come to an agreement upon the doctrine of this sacrament.  It cannot escape your prudence, how exceedingly the church of God has been injured by dissensions and varieties of opinion respecting this sacrament of unity; and though they are now in some measure removed, yet I could wish for an agreement in this doctrine, not only as regards the subject itself, but also with respect to the words and forms of expression.  You have now my wish, about which I have also written to masters Philip [Melancthon] and Bullinger; and I pray you to deliberate among yourselves as to the means by which this synod can be assembled with the greatest convenience.  Farewell.  Lambeth, March 20, 1552
              Your very dear brother in Christ,
                  THOMAS CANTUAR.

  ARCHBISHOP CRANMER TO PHILIP MELANCTHON.
  Lambeth
  March 27, 1552
    We read in the Acts of the Apostles, that when a dispute had arisen, as to whether those who from among the Gentiles had been turned to God, should be compelled to be circumcised, and keep the law of Moses, the apostles and elders came together to consider of this matter; and having compared their opinions, delivered the judgment of their council in a written epistle.  This example I wish we ourselves could imitate, in whose churches the doctrine of the gospel has been restored and purified.  But although all controversies cannot be removed in this world, (because the party which is hostile to the truth, will not assent to the judgment of the church,) it is nevertheless to be desired that the members of the true church should agree among themselves upon the chief heads of ecclesiastical doctrine.  But it cannot escape your notice, how greatly religious dissensions, especially in the matter of the Lords supper, have rent the churches asunder:  had they been settled before, the emperor, I think, would never have made war against you.  And it is truly grievous that the sacrament of unity is made by the malice of the devil food for disagreement, and (as it were) the apple of contention.  I could wish therefore, that those who excel others in erudition and judgment, should be assembled together, after the example of the apostles, and declare their judgment as well respecting other subjects of dispute, as likewise especially respecting this controversy, and attest their agreement by some published document.  But you will perhaps say, “And I also have often expressed the same wish; but this matter cannot be effected without the aid of princes.”  I have therefore [consulted with] the king’s majesty, who places his kingdom of England at your disposal, and most graciously promises not only a place of security and quiet, but also his aid and assistance towards these godly endeavors.  I have written likewise to masters Calvin and Bullinger, and exhorted them not to be wanting to a work so necessary, and so useful to the commonwealth of Christendom.  You wrote me word in your last letter that the Areopagites of the council of Trent are making decrees respecting the worship of the host.  Wherefore, since the adversaries of the gospel meet together with so much zeal for the establishment of error, we must not allow them to be more diligent in confirming ungodliness, than we are in propagating and setting forth the doctrine of godliness.  Your commendation of master George Major has greatly increased that regard for him, which his merits have produced in me; and if I can be of service to him in any way, he shall find my ability will fail sooner than my inclination.  Farewell and happily.  Lambeth, March 27, 1552
            Very desirous of seeing you some time,
                THOMAS CANTUAR.

  ARCHBISHOP CRANMER TO THE WIDOW OF MARTIN BUCER.
  Lambeth
  April 20, 1552
    Greeting.  The especial favor with which I regarded your husband during his lifetime, is by no means diminished now that he is no more.  His remarkable piety indeed, and profound learning, has produced not a transient but an everlasting benefit to the church; whereby he has not only bound all godly persons, but myself more than all of them, under perpetual obligations to him.  You must not therefore on any account allow yourself to be deterred from writing to me, should there be any thing in which I can be of use to you or to your affairs.  For stirred up by your letters, I shall not only recall to myself, and not without satisfaction, the agreeable remembrance of a very dear friend; but will also most readily perform to you, his widow, those offices of kindness, which the word of God commands to be paid, and which shall be afforded you as occasion shall offer.  With respect to what you have lately informed me, that it is necessary for the expediting of your affairs that it should be certified and attested by some formal document that the sum of a hundred marks which you received as a present from the king’s majesty, when you left this country, belongs especially and exclusively to yourself, I have written a letter to the guardians of Bucer’s children, whereby they may clearly ascertain what was the intention of our most serene king upon the matter in question.  I send you a copy of the letter of the lords of the council to master John Hales, his majesty’s treasurer, (who is now, I think, at Strasburgh,) or to his deputy in his absence, written in English, which clearly testifies that a hundred marks were presented you by his majesty, and that too, after the death of your husband, inasmuch as that letter was written on the last day of March, and your husband departed this life at the end of February.  May God, who is the fountain and father of all comfort, vouchsafe to comfort you, and preserve you with all your family!  Farewell.  Lambeth, April 20, 1552
          Yours to the utmost of his power,
              THOMAS CANTUAR.

  ARCHBISHOP CRANMER TO CONRAD HUBERT, AND OTHERS.
  Lambeth
  April 20, 1552
    Greeting.  As I have lately understood, from a letter written to this place by the widow of master Bucer of pious memory, that for the purpose of dividing the property of her deceased husband amongst his children, a certain declaration or certificate is necessary respecting the sum of a hundred marks, presented by his majesty, as to whether it belongs to the widow or to the children; whereby the fact may be ascertained, and all doubt entirely removed; I affirm and attest that the said sum of a hundred marks was especially bestowed by his most serene majesty upon master Bucer’s widow, after his death, and intended for her especial use; as is clearly manifest from the letter which the lords of the council wrote to the treasurer, a copy of which I have sent to master Bucer’s widow.  May God direct you by his holy Sprit, and grant you success in the labors of your calling!  Farewell.  Lambeth, April 20, 1552
                Yours heartily,
                  T. CANT.

  ARCHBISHOP CRANMER TO PETER MARTYR.
  unknown
  1555
  background: from prison
    After much health in Christ our Savior.  As letters are then only necessary, when the messenger is either not sufficiently discreet, or is unacquainted with the circumstances we wish to communicate, or not thought worthy to be entrusted with secrets; and since by the goodness of God the bearer of this has fallen in my way, a man, as you know, of signal discretion, most faithful in all matters entrusted to him, exceedingly attached to us both, and possessing an entire acquaintance with the circumstances of our country, from whose mouth you may learn all that has taken place here; I have not thought it needful to write to you more at length, especially as letters are wont to occasion so much danger and mischief.  Yet I have not deemed it right to pass over this one thing, which I have learned by experience, namely, that God never shines forth more brightly, and pours out the beams of his mercy and consolation, or of strength and firmness of spirit, more clearly or impressively upon the minds of his people, than when they are under the most extreme pain and distress, both of mind and body, that he may then more especially show himself to be the God of his people, when he seems to have altogether forsaken them; then raising them up when they think he is bringing them down, and laying them low; then glorifying them, when he is thought to be confounding them; then quickening them, when he is thought to be destroying them.  So that we may say with Paul, “When I am weak, then am I strong; and if I must needs glory, I will glory in my infirmities, in prisons, in revilings, in distresses, in persecutions, in sufferings for Christ.”  I pray God to grant that I may endure to the end!  Nothing is at this time more distressing to me, than that no answer has as yet been given to M.A., to whose subtilties, and juggling tricks, and ravings, a reply would not have been wanting long since, had not books and liberty been wanting to myself.  I have written to no one but you, nor do I wish any one to know that I have written to you:  wherefore salute no one in my name.
                THOMAS CRANMER.

  MILES COVERDALE TO JOHN CALVIN.
  Frankfort
  March 26, 1548
    I cannot but avail myself, most illustrious sir, of the offered opportunity of saluting your worthiness.  There was brought hither three days since, during the time of the fair, a certain little book in English, containing that Order of Holy Communion which the king’s majesty has set forth, as suitable to the present time.  And as I perceived many persons were desirous of obtaining it, I forthwith translated it both into German and Latin.  And therefore, when I understood the godly bearer of this letter to be a townsman of yours, I thought I should gratify your reverence by sending you this trifling present.  One of the translations I intended for the Germans; the other, namely the Latin one, I am exceedingly anxious should be forwarded to your reverence.  And should you feel inclined to make known to others this cause for congratulation, and first-fruits of godliness, (according as the Lord now wills his religion to revive in England,) you will be able to commit this token of my affection for you to the pres more easily than I can.  I am now on my return to England, having been invited thither after an exile of eight years.  Farewell, most excellent master, and affectionately salute your wife, who deserved as well from me and mine, when we went up to Strasburgh.  Frankfort, March 26, 1548
    MICHAEL (alias MILO) COVERDALE, Anglus.

  MILES COVERDALE TO PAUL FAGIUS.
  Windsor Castle
  Oct. 21, 1548
    Peace and joy in the Holy Ghost!  Your letter, most excellent sir, dated on the 22nd of August, I received from my wife on the 8th of this present month, with exceeding compassion for those individuals whom this dreadful tyranny so greatly distresses.  I also showed your letter yesterday to the most reverend the archbishop of Canterbury; who, as he has undertaken to educate your dear son (whom he has just sent away to Canterbury, by reason of the plague that is raging at this place), both in religion and learning, at his own expense; in like manner, reflecting upon the lamentable condition of your churches, he truly sympathizes in your misfortune: wherefore he desired you most especially to come over to us, rather than to go away either into Turkey or Hungary.  Oh! my master, if you should seek a refuge any where else than with us, since the faithlessness of  mankind is every where so great, how will that most excellent gift, which the good and gracious God has bestowed upon you, grow cool!  If the most reverend archbishop, whose answer I enclosed in my letter to you, had foreseen so much danger to the church, truly what I wrote to you would have been no impediment.  You must think therefore that we are both of us sorry for what we did, although there was nothing stated in those letters but what the occasion then called for.  For myself, indeed, my master, I am in no little apprehension both for yourself and for our churches and schools deprived of your most happy  ministrations.  Wherefore, although our rulers may not invite you by name, eminent as you are among the best scholars of Germany, and this probably, as I have before hinted to you, from secret motives; yet we, who know you well, entreat you most solemnly to come over to us, where you need not doubt but that you will be most acceptable, and therefore treated with the greatest kindness.  Farewell.  From the king’s castle, which we call Windsor.  Oct. 21, 1548
            Yours from my heart,
              M. COVERDALE.

  JOHN HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  Strasburgh
  Jan. 27, 1546
    Not many years since, most honored master, and much loved brother in Christ, when I was a courtier, and living too much of a court life in the palace of our king, there most happily and auspiciously came under my notice certain writings of master Huldrich Zuinglius, a most excellent man, of pious memory; and also some commentaries upon the epistles of St. Paul, which your reverence had published for the general benefit, and which will prove a lasting monument of your renown.
    These singular gifts of God exhibited by you to the world at large, I was unwilling to neglect, especially as I perceived them seriously to affect the eternal salvation and happiness of my soul; so that I thought it well worth my while, night and day, with earnest study, and an almost superstitious diligence, to devote my entire attention to your writings.  Nor was my labor in this respect over wearisome to me:  for after I had arrived at manhood, and by the kindness of my father enjoyed the means of living more unrestrainedly, I had begun to blaspheme God by impious worship and all manner of idolatry, following the evil ways of my forefathers, before I rightly understood what God was.  But being at length delivered by the goodness of God, for which I am solely indebted to him and to yourselves, nothing now remains for me in reference to the remainder of my life and my last hour, but to worship God with a pure heart, and know my defects while living in this body, since indeed the tenure of life is deceitful, and every man is altogether as nothing; and to serve my godly brethren in Christ, and the ungodly for Christ: for I do not think that a Christian is born for himself, or that he ought to live to himself, but to refer it to God as the author, and regard every thing that he possesses as common to all, according as the necessities and wants of his brethren may require.  I am indeed ashamed beyond measure, that I have not performed these duties heretofore; but that like a brute beast, as the greater part of mankind are wont to do, I have been a slave to my own lusts: but it is better to be wise late, than not at all.
    By reason of my love and respect towards you, I had often proposed to visit you, though I have always been prevented hitherto, partly by my ill-health, and partly because I am mistrustful of the favor of fortune; for my father, of whom I am the only son and heir, is so opposed to me on account of Christ’s religion, that should I refuse to act according to his wishes, I shall be sure to find him for the future, not a father, but a cruel tyrant.  Shortly however, in about a month’s time, I mean to go down to my native place to bid farewell to the honors, pleasures, and friends of this world; and I will then endeavor, if possible, by the assistance of my friends, to obtain at least some portion of what I am entitled to, wherewith I may be able to subsist upon my slender means among you at Zurich: and should God order it otherwise, and see fit to visit me with poverty and want, or in any other way, I will bear it with an undisturbed mind, and choose rather, as an exile, to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of Christ (I use the words of St. Paul) greater riches than the treasures in Egypt; for I have respect unto the recompence of the reward, and hope for eternal life, obtained, not by my merits, but by the blood of Christ.  I entreat you, therefore, O man of God, by our Lord Jesus Christ, that you aid me in this journey by your prayers to God for me.  For I am in fear, and not without reason, of those perfidious bishops, to whom nothing is more acceptable than the spilling of the blood of the godly, and whose temper and disposition I have often experienced to the great peril of my life.  I desire therefore, to defend myself against their treachery and tyranny with the remedies that God has given me; and I seek the aid of your church, that by the help of her prayers I may derive some comfort, according to the promise of God, who is ever present with all who call upon him in truth, and from whom alone assistance is to be sought for in every kind of danger.  For there cannot be a more powerful safeguard than believing prayer:  by this Hezekiah overcame the king of the Assyrians, Elijah called down dire from heaven, and Jehoshaphat obtained a signal victory.  But I will dilate no longer upon this subject, for fear of offending your pious and learned ears by so rude and unpolished a letter.
    Accept, my very dear master, in few words, the news from England.  As far as true religion is concerned, idolatry is no where in greater vigor.  Our king has destroyed the pope, but not popery; he has expelled all the monks and nuns, and pulled down their monasteries; he has caused all their possessions to be transferred into his exchequer, and yet they are bound, even the frail female sex, by the king’s command, to perpetual chastity.  England has at this time at least ten thousand nuns, not one of whom is allowed to marry.  The impious mass, the most shameful celibacy of the clergy, the invocation of saints, auricular confession, superstitious abstinence from meats, and purgatory, were never before held by the people in greater esteem than at the present moment,.
    I have just been informed by letter, that the treaty, which was concluded two years since between the emperor and our king, is renewed:  may God direct every thing to the glory of his name!  There is no hope of peace between France and England, but we are in daily expectation of a bloody war.
    The chief supporters of the gospel in England are dying every hour:  many very illustrious personages have departed within these two years; the lord chancellor Audley, the duke of Suffolk, [Sir Edward] Baynton, the queen’s first lord of the bedchamber; Poinings, the kind’s deputy at Boulogne; Sir Thomas Wyat, known throughout the whole world for his noble qualities, and a most zealous defender of yours and Christ’s religion; Dr. Butts, a physician who had the charge of the king’s person:  all these were of the privy council, and real favorers of the gospel, and promoted the glory of God to the utmost of their power.  They all died of the plague and fever; so that the country is now left altogether to the bishops, and those who despise God and all true religion.
    The bishops of Winchester and Westminster are now on an embassy from our kind to the emperor in Brabant.  Another bishop, namely, of Durham, who was sent into Picardy to treat there with the ambassadors of the king of France respecting a peace between the French and English, has lately returned to England without the accomplishment of that object.  The state of affairs between the Scots and English is still very doubtful and uncertain: the English however have sacked their principal cities and villages; but I shudder to mention the devastation of that country, which was effected last summer by the earl of Hertford.  The queen of Scotland, together with the cardinal [Beaton], is lying in concealment in the mountains, where they possess fortresses beyond the reach of attack.
    The conference at Ratisbon, as far as I understand by a letter from master Bucer, is suspended:  I am more inclined to believe this, because Philip Melancthon is neither yet come to them, nor does he intend it.  And Bucer, as I hear, is about to come to us sooner than I expected: but as yet we have nothing certain; as soon as this shall be the case, I will inform your reverence forthwith, and you may expect a more copious letter whenever any new tidings shall require it.  The count Palatine has lately provided for the preaching of the gospel throughout his dominions: but as far as relates to the eucharist he has descended, as the proverb has it, from the horse to the ass; for he has fallen from popery into the doctrine of Luther, who is in that particular more erroneous than all the papists; and those who deny the substance of bread to remain in the sacrament, and substitute the body of Christ in its place, come more closely to the truth than those who affirm that the natural body of Christ is with the bread, in the bread, and under the form of bread, and yet occupies no place.  God I hope will at length give him a better mind.
    Master Richard [Hilles] the Englishman, and his godly wife, salute you affectionately in Christ.  He has now in his house two sisters of noble family, the younger of whom, named Anna, is exceedingly favorable to true religion.  She prays for your continued happiness, and commends herself, whom I hope you will see shortly, to the prayers of your church.  Salute affectionately in my name those excellent men masters Bibliander and Pellican, with the other godly brethren.  Farewell, most learned and godly sir, and suffer me, I pray you, to be numbered amongst those who truly and from the heart admire the majesty of your religion.  Strasburgh, Jan. 27, [1546].
          Yours entirely,
            JOHN HOOPER, Anglus.

  JOHN HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER
  unknown
  unknown
    If your engagements would permit, I should much wish to ascertain your judgment and opinion.  I certainly do not consider it lawful for a godly man to be present at the mass and impious observances of the like kind among the papists; but yet there are some arguments which in some measure press my mind, and for a time keep me in suspense.  Master Calvin has written much upon that subject; but, as it appears to me, he hardly satisfies the arguments which may be alleged against him, one or two of which I will propose to your erudition.
    Concerning Naaman the Syrian, though it is not allowable to bring forward a private individual by way of general example, yet it very much bears upon the subject before us; for the prophet said, “Go in peace.”  Persons, who are unacquainted with the Hebrew, understand this expression as though the prophet had said, “If you choose to return, it will be at your peril, but I do not sanction your doing so:” in my opinion, however, the Hebrew words will not bear this interpretation; for, go in peace, is and expression of command and confirmation, and therefore the prophet permitted Naaman to worship the true God in the house of Rimmon, with the hope of gaining over the king of Syria and others to the true God: and, if I rightly interpret this passage, as the prophet gave this permission to a godly man, so we ought also to make the same allowance ourselves.
    In the time of Elijah, when he complained before God that he was the only worshipper of the true religion then remaining, he was informed by the divine voice that there were left seven thousand.  Now certainly, if this great number of men had kept themselves aloof from the idolatrous worship, there must have been at least some few of them known to the prophet of God; nor do I see how any one can deny that though these pious men, by the mention of whom God comforts his afflicted servant, were often openly and publicly in the idol-temples together with a yet more numerous assemblage of the ungodly, they nevertheless retained in their hearts a pure and holy reverence for the one true God.  No argument moves me more than this.
    In the same way as God forbids idolatry, does he also prohibit adultery, fornication, and other kinds of wickedness; nor does he condemn one more than another: but no one is bound to leave his country, as they say, by reason of either one or the other.
    I do not write these things, my accomplished friend, merely for the sake of learning your opinion; but when I have once ascertained it, I shall, by God’s blessing, most diligently follow it without any deceit or dissimulation: not that I am in any doubt upon the subject myself; but I desire to satisfy some godly men who are not yet sufficiently instructed in the faith.  May the Lord Jesus long preserve you in safety!  Salute, I pray you, your wife in my name, and my English brother and friend in Christ, master Burcher, who resides with you at Zurich.
              Yours to serve,
                JOHN HOOPER, Anglus

  JOHN HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER
  unknown
  unknown
    Much health.  I received, most excellent and revered friend in Christ, at Strasburgh, almost a year ago, your equally learned and godly letter, in which you desired altogether to convince me that the true worship of God could have nothing in common with outward idolatry:  you therefore considered it more advisable and consistent with godliness, that I should rather endure the loss of home and fortune for Christ’s sake, than participate in the ungodly worship of the mass.  I reverence and cherish this advice, and willingly come into the same opinion.  I cannot repay to your excellence the thanks you deserve; but I pray that he who works all in all, and who when called upon in true faith through his Son Jesus Christ, will do far more than we can believe, may be, according to his mercy and loving-kindness, your exceeding great reward and recompence.  Of this I have no doubt, that you will be, when this frail tabernacle is dissolved, the everlasting friend of God.  Meanwhile, as long as you continue in this life, defend your churches, deliver them from wolves and hirelings, gather together the people of God, and bring back his flock, now miserably scattered, to Christ the true and only shepherd:  fight the good fight; there is laid up for you a crown of righteousness, which you shall receive from the righteous Judge in that day.
    I will relate to your excellence in person the events of my long and most dangerous journey to England.  I suffered many things by land; twice I suffered bonds and imprisonment; whence being marvelously delivered by the mercy of God, though with the heavy loss of my fortune, I was wretchedly harassed by sea for three months both by enemies and storms.  But the end is not yet; and I pray God that whatever may yet remain to me of this wretched life, may be for the glory of his name, and for the edification of his church.  Having been delivered from fire and water, I came upon war:  I see nothing but the death of all godliness and religion; the enemy of God will destroy (if it be possible that the faith of Peter can perish) every mouth that speaks of Christ, and the mother with her children, that is, the universal church:  but the Lord, I doubt not, will look down upon his people, and not suffer the tyranny of this cruel enemy to rage at pleasure.  In the mean time let us be heartily and truly turned unto the Lord, and he will undoubtedly look upon our tears.  But alas! gracious Lord, we are sleeping in the greatest security, while in the greatest danger; and it is therefore no wonder if we terribly experience the wrath of God, and the heavy consequences of our ungodliness.  Let us amend therefore, lest he inflict upon us yet greater severities, namely, to become after this life the everlasting enemies of God: let us patiently bear, as the time requires, the chastisement that our sins have deserved; for he punishes the children of men for their iniquities.
    The bearer will inform your excellence of the good news we received yesterday from Strasburgh.  There will be a change of religion in England, and the king will take up the gospel of Christ, in case the emperor should be defeated in this most destructive war: should the gospel sustain a loss, he will then retain his impious mass, for which he has this last summer committed four respectable and godly persons to the flames.  Our king has now confined in the tower of London the duke of Norfolk, together with his eldest son and heir: they say that both father and son had conspired the death of the king and of our prince,--a horrible deed, if my account is correct.
    My wife most dutifully salutes your excellence, with the other learned and godly persons among you.  We hope to visit you shortly, God willing.  Master de Valys, together with his wife and all his family, wish for you every happiness.  There is in his house a certain godly and learned youth, whom I intend to bring down with me to Zurich: I request you, for Christ’s sake, if it be possible, to procure him a teachership in some class in your school.  He is studious and diligent, and will not shrink from the severest labors; and if he can but meet with some moderate means of subsistence, he will be of service to the church of God: remember him for Christ’s sake, and let your excellence, if possible, write me an answer.  Nothing can come to me more acceptably than a letter from you.  May the Lord Jesus long preserve you in safety, to the glory of his name, and the benefit of his church!  Amen.  Salute in my name masters Bibliander, Pellican, Gualter, and all the rest.  I earnestly commend myself to the prayers of your church.  Excuse, I pray you, my pen running on too fast.  I request your excellence to salute in my name, and that of my wife, the godly matron Falkner, who came with us to Basle from Strasburgh, which place she left unmarried, but I have now, with the consent of her parents, bestowed her in marriage.
          Your excellence’s most attached,
                JOHN HOOPER.

  JOHN HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER
  unknown
  unknown
  background: sometime after Sept. 10, 1547
    The order of battle between the Scots and English in Scotland on the 10th of September, four miles from Edinburgh.
    Lord Grey, the king of England’s deputy at Boulogne, and the commander in chief of the English cavalry in this battle, after the artillery was silenced, made a charge upon the Scottish front, with a view of throwing them into confusion; but disappointed of his expectation, he was forced to retreat with the loss of forty-eight of his cavalry.  The earl of Warwick, who commanded the archers, perceiving the cavalry to give way, immediately and suddenly advanced with 4000 archers, and attacked that part of the Scottish army where the artillery and baggage were stationed.  He so pressed the Scots by the discharge of his arrows, that they were unable any longer to stand to their guns, which having gained possession of, by his cannon-balls and volleys of arrows he compelled the whole Scottish army to fall back from their former position into one where they had not only the enemy both in front and rear, but also the sun shining full in their eyes.  Which when lord Grey perceived, he made a second attack with his cavalry on their flank with much noise and clamor, shouting, “The Scots, being inferior in cavalry, were quite unable to keep their ranks, which being thrown into disorder, they betook themselves to flight; in the which there fell 15,000 men, and 2,000 were taken prisoners, among whom was lord Huntley, the chancellor of Scotland.  On the same day the English ships sailed into the various Scottish harbors, and took possession of all their vessels which were adapted either for trade or naval warfare; the rest they burned.  The queen, upon the receipt of this unfortunate intelligence, gave herself up to the protector upon his own terms.  Taking with him six of the nobility as hostages for the fidelity of the queen, and leaving troops in five places of the kingdom of Scotland, for fear lest any rebellion should take place during his absence, he returned to London, where parliament is daily expected to meet, in which, if it please God, this quarrel will be settled.  This is a true statement; for my informant was present at the battle, and witnessed the close of it.
            Your excellence’s ever devoted,
                  JOHN HOOPER.
    The number of soldiers belonging to each army were, of the English seventeen thousand, of the Scots thirty thousand.

  JOHN HOOPER TO MARTIN BUCER.
  Zurich
  June 19, 1548
    Much health.  The day before I wrote this letter, I met master Pellican, whom I saluted in your name, and at your request.  He has received into his family the widow of master Matthias, a godly and upright woman: I understood from him that you had sent me a letter by her; and he requested me that, if I had any thing to write in reply, I would do it by the morrow, for on that day the widow was about to leave us.  I was unwilling therefore that she should return to you without a letter from me, lest you should think me undeserving of your godly epistle, which I read with the greatest possible affection and delight.  You say well, that in this shall all men know that we are Christ’s disciples, “if we have love one to another:” let us love therefore, “not in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth.”  For love is the most certain evidence of our justification, and the heavenly seal of our acceptance in Christ Jesus; as John says, “Every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God; he that loveth not, knoweth not God, for God is love.”  If indeed we have tasted that the Lord is gracious, “let us cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light, walking honestly, as in the day, not in strife and envying, but putting on the Lord Jesus Christ;” that we may restore the infirmities of our brethren in the spirit of meekness, or patiently bear with them.  Let all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envyings be put away, for we are new-born babes, to the end that we may desire the sincere milk of the word, and grow thereby.
    My master, I pray you in Christ Jesus, not to pay too much regard to envious and slanderous calumniators.  You are not ignorant that the malevolence of envy is ever wont to tear most persons in pieces; that detractors invent many falsehoods, and that brotherly love is disturbed by envy and detraction.  Away with the persons who would sow dissension between yourself and those men.  This I promise you, that they very frequently make mention of you in friendly and honorable terms.  And although they may dissent from your opinion in the matter of the eucharist, as I do myself, yet they do not make any breach in Christian love, much less regard you with hostility, but are anxious to aid by their prayers both yourself and those whom the Lord has entrusted to you in his church; and they earnestly hope that, on your part, you will do the same for them.  For Christ’s sake therefore, who by his own blood has triumphed on the cross over al enemies, hell, and sin, be ye not at variance through strife and emulation, that ye may neither quarrel any more with your tongue, nor give ear to those persons who are deficient in nothing but religion and virtue.  Let controversy be settled by the authority of the word.  Let no one defend his opinion with obstinacy; but let us rather return unto the way of truth, and humbly acknowledge our errors, than continue always to go on in error without repentance, lest we should seem to have been in the wrong.  Let us bear in mind that we were made for friendship and concord, that in this most miserable age we may, by our mutual kindness, relieve the distresses of each other, and at last reign together with Christ in everlasting happiness.  For what frenzy is it, what folly or madness, to pursue with hostility here on earth that individual, who, should he die in Christ, will pass from death unto life, (whither I also, Christ being my guide, hope to flee away after this darkness,) and with whom we shall be united in perpetual love and everlasting joy!  I entreat you, my master, not to say or write any thing against charity or godliness for the sake of Luther, or burden the consciences of men with his words on the holy supper.  Although I readily acknowledge with thankfulness the gifts of God in him who is now no more, yet he was not without his faults.  I do not say this by way of reproach of the departed individual, because I know that no living man is without blame, and that we all stand in need of the grace of God.  After the dispute with Zuinglius and Œcolampadius respecting the [Lord’s] supper had begun to grow warm, he did violence to many passages of scripture, such for instance as the following, “He ascended that he might fill all things;” “I am with you alway even unto the end of the world;” and “we are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones;” that he might establish the corporal presence of the body of Christ in the bread; but how mistakenly, is declared by the very nature of the passages.  Did we not at this present time stand in need of consolation rather than of controversy, I could easily prove to the satisfaction of every one, that these places cannot properly be brought forward in confirmation of his opinion.  Every one too is aware, with what calumnies and reproaches he attacked even the dead.  Christ taught his disciples another doctrine.  He rebuked James and John, who wished that fire might fall from heaven to consume the people of Samaria.  And he has commanded us to do good to our enemies, and bless them that curse us.  He, my good sir, who knows the secrets of the heart, may judge what spirit occasioned so much wrath to be kindled among the ministers of the word of God.  Nevertheless all the ministers of this church were grieved at his death, not as if they had lost an adversary or a detractor, but rather an ally and partner in their glorious work.  These things are, in my mind, great and real evidences of kindness and charity.  I do not write thus by way of reproach of a most learned man, but that no one may swear by his opinions, as if whatever he wrote were an oracle of Apollo, or a leaf of the Sibyl.
    You write word, reverend sir, that you cannot believe the sacraments to be bare signs.  Far be such a belief from the most unlearned Christian!  The holy supper is not a bare sign, neither in it is the true and natural body of Christ corporally exhibited to me in any supernatural or heavenly manner:  nevertheless, I religiously and with all honor venerate and reverence the institution of Christ upon other grounds, because it is a sign of the good-will of God towards me, and an outward testimony added to the promise of grace.  Not that this promise is applied to me by means of any sacrament, but because the promise previously applied to me by faith is thereby confirmed.  In like manner the church of God publicly receives him in baptism, who had been previously received by grace.  Thus Abraham, says Paul, “received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had yet being uncircumcised;” that is, a testimony by which God bare witness that he was received into grace, not that he was to be received by the sacrament, but rather confirmed in it.  Thus the holy supper is a testimony of grace, and a mystery of our redemption, in which God bears witness to the benefits bestowed upon us by Christ: not that the remission of sins, which in believers ought to precede all use of sacraments, is there applied; nor that the true body of Christ, which is in heaven and not on earth, is exhibited together with the bread; but that it may confirm that faith which I have in the death and passion of that body which was alive, died, and rose again.  And the minister gives what is in his power, namely, the bread and wine, and not the body of Christ; nor is it exhibited by the minister, and eaten by the communicant, otherwise than in the word preached, read, or meditated upon.  And to eat the body of Christ is nothing else than to believe, as he himself teaches in the sixth of John.  It is necessary therefore to bring Christ to the sacraments by faith, and not to look for him there.  And thus the promise of grace is received by faith, as are also the sacraments, of which faith they are the testimonies and the seals.  There are many other ends, but this is the chief; and those who thus use the sacraments do not make them bare signs.  Thus John the Baptist said, that he baptized with water, but that there was one to come after him who should baptize with the Holy Ghost.  He had water in his hand, by which remission of sins was confirmed in those who believed; but he had not in his hand the Holy Ghost, that he might give remission of sins to all that were baptized; for he baptized many hypocrites.  From these sensible objects therefore faith teaches us to recognize things insensible and invisible.  Regard these things, I pray you, in a godly spirit.  I do not write for the sake of dispute, but that I may testify to you, that the sacraments with us are not bare signs.  For if faith shine forth in the mind of the recipient, the bridegroom is thereby joined to the bride, so that none may put asunder what God hath joined together.
    I do not rightly understand what you write respecting Calvin.  I had never any intention of using my pen either against him or Farell, although his commentaries on the first epistle to the Corinthians displeased me exceedingly.  I should have written my thoughts upon the Interim, had I not been told for certain that you were about to do so; which I earnestly entreat you to do, as you possess great and peculiar gifts of God, and in a thousand ways are far more fitted for this undertaking than I am, who have but lately, and as yet only in a cursory way, studied the Greek language.  May the Lord Jesus ever preserve you both in body and soul, to the glory of his name!  My wife salutes you.  Zurich, June 19, 1548
                Your very loving,
                    JOHN HOOPER.

  JOHN HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  Basle
  March 28, 1549
    Much health.  By the mercy of God, most reverend master and gossip, we arrived at Basle about 10 o’clock on the 27th of March, safe and sound; and if the sailors are to be relied upon, we shall sail from hence tomorrow morning.  To spare expense therefore, I send away the driver with the carriage and horses, and hope your worthy citizen will receive all his property safe and uninjured by tomorrow evening.  That I have been longer delayed upon my journey than he expected, to his inconvenience and my great expense, must be attributed to the roughness of the journey, and not to any loitering on my part or fatigue of the horses.  I entreat you to offer my warmest thanks to this excellent man; or else impose his duty of courtesy in my name and at my request upon our very loving friend, master Gualter, who, if I mistake not, is related either by consanguinity or affinity to the owner of the horses.
    Nothing new is as yet reported to us at this place, excepting only that some persons who have just arrived from Strasburgh, affirm for certain that the mass is not yet admitted by the citizens.  For this reason the bishop of that city is not merely angry, but rages as it were with madness and fury, and has appointed a conference in his own territory about two [German] miles from Strasburgh; and all those who have visited me here in a way of friendship, tell me that he is bringing forth some horrible monstrosity; but it will, I hope, prove abortive.
    You will receive from the bearer one sheet, a blanket, and a pillow, with many thanks; all the other things that I borrowed to make use of upon my journey I shall send back as far as Basle.  In haste.  Basle, 1549
    You shall hear more, God willing, in the course of three days.  I send back a flask; to whom it belongs, I know not.  Inquire, I pray you, of my landlord, and do not grudge to undertake this office for my sake, who so boldly presume to impose all my burdens upon your shoulders.
            Your most devoted,
                JOHN HOOPER.
    P.S.  We salute most respectfully your dear wife with all your family, masters Theodore [Bibliander], Pellican, Gualter, Butler, and all the rest.

  LETTER XXVII. JOHN HOOPER TOHENRY BULLINGER.
  Strasburgh
  March 31, 1549
    Much health.  Grace and peace from the Lord.  I obey your command, my very dear friend and gossip, that I should acquaint you with the progress of our journey.  We arrived at Strasburgh on the 29th instant, all of us, by the blessing and favor of God, safe and sound.  We think of remaining here till the third of April, that we may join some worthy and excellent companions who are now on their way to the fair.  The fretfulness too of our little daughter Rachel in some measure prevents our journey; for she is cutting her teeth, and exposure to the air aggravates the painfulness of incipient illness.
    I believe there is no truth in the reports respecting Hedio.  On the 30th of this month I was present at his lecture, which was upon the 10th chapter of the epistle to the Romans.  He spoke very clearly and openly upon the excellency of the word of God, and warned his hearers most carefully to beward of the beguiling snares of the Interim.  What he said however, I think, proceeded rather from excessive terror and alarm, than from actual dislike.  He is not wanting in godliness, but he has too great a dread of offending the emperor.  On the same day I was present at his evening sermon, where, among other things that he said, and which I heard with pain, he absurdly inveighed with great bitterness against the Suvermerians.  May the Lord forgive him, and bring him to a better mind!
    Paul Fagius left this place before my arrival.  Bucer, I believe, will depart this evening, but I do not yet know whither he is going.  He is invited into England, Poland, and Saxony.  He received me at dinner yesterday, where I met John Sturmius, Sapidus, and Christopher Mont.  They were very much delighted at the concord of the people of Switzerland, which I pray the Lord to continue and confirm.  I myself, my wife, Rachel, and Joanna, diligently commend to our good and gracious God in our prayers the well being of yourself and all your family, and that of the other most godly  ministers of your church, all of whom we sincerely and cordially salute.  Farewell, most excellent and ever esteemed sir.  Strasburgh, March 31
                Your most devoted,
                    JOHN HOOPER.

  LETTER XXVIII. JOHN HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  Mayence
  April 8, 1549
    Much health.  I hope, my worthy friend and gossip, that the letter which I wrote to you on my journey was safely delivered; by which you would ascertain our route and progress as far as Strasburgh.  We sailed from thence on the second of April, all of us by the goodness and favor of God in good health.  The first day of our voyage from Strasburgh was a prosperous one, with the wind and stream in our favor: on the second day also God was not less gracious to us.  We passed the night of this day in a village near Spires, where on the same day there had been dining sixty-four Spaniards, all cavalry, who were going up towards the duchy of Wurtemberg, so sharpened by hunger, that they left the landlords neither flesh nor fish for us.  We fared very sparingly, satisfying ourselves with their broken victuals.  There is no distinction of meat among them, nor any observance of days, for which such abundance of Christian blood is shed by the madness of the papists.  The third day of our voyage passed most comfortably; the fourth was somewhat dangerous.  We met with a contrary wind, high waves, ignorant and careless sailors, so that we were twice exposed to great peril; and unless we had reached the land, which we effected with great difficulty, we should all of us have been lost.  This happened about half a mile from Mayence:  we all entered the city on foot, safe and sound.  The other vessel which accompanied us suffered far more than we did; much of the cargo was spoiled by the water, and the master of the vessel, knocked about by the violence of the storm, just as he was about to cast anchor, got his leg entangled in the cable which sustained the whole weight of the anchor, and was hurt very severely.  At Mayence we sojourned at the Golden Swan, where we found six merchants who had come from the city of Liege.  They told us that the emperor was now at Brussels with his son Philip in great triumph and magnificence.  They say that the wily and bad landgrave is detained prisoner near Ghent.  I inquired whether the emperor was preparing a second expedition into upper Germany.  They replied that no rumors of that kind had been spread amongst them.  I asked too concerning the people of the lake territories.  They told me that the emperor would lead all his forces against them this summer.  May the victory be on their side, who most desire the safety of the church of Christ!  Let us pray God, and he will deliver his people out of temptations.  I have great hope that this will be the case, provided only they are cemented by a holy concord, which alone can destroy the power of the emperor.  The affairs of Saxony are fluctuating and uncertain, and, as it is reported here, are placed in the greatest danger by reason of intestine discords, by which, if they are not healed, they will mutually destroy each other.
    I have nothing to write respecting England, except that she is miserably and dangerously exposed to a bloody war, and is safe on no side.  The French and Scots are open enemies; there is a third in secret, more powerful than either of them; and I fear that he will take advantage of the present juncture.  I have often earnestly besought you and your people to interpose your mediation between France and England; and I now again and again suppliantly entreat and beseech you the same thing, for the sake of Christ, who is the restorer of peace.  Bear in mind that reward which is promised you by him who cannot lie: “Blessed are the peace-makes, for they shall be called the children of God.”  Let not the majesty of the royal name or the vapouring of any other title deter you.  Moreover, the state and condition of the king and the realm of England is now very different from what it was formerly:  he is your brother, he worships the same God with yourselves, and, I hope, in the same manner.  But if they will go on as they are doing, and will admit of no equitable terms, one or the other of them must necessarily yield before long.
    A new gold coinage is now being struck in England of a purer standard than that which was coined under the late king; but what is increased in one way is diminished in another, for the standard weight of the crowns is diminished by nearly a fourth part.  I will not be unmindful of the cloth which I promised you, but will send it as soon as I possibly can.
    While I was writing the above, the letter, my most reverend master and gossip, was delivered to me, which you wrote on the 26th of March.  In truth I received nothing with greater pleasure than this evidence of your good health and earth, long preserve to you safe and sound!  I wish you had written one word respecting that pious matron, my good friend, the wife of master Bibliander.  I hope in the Lord Jesus that she has had a happy delivery:  were it otherwise, I should be much concerned.  I should now write to my worthy gossip, master Bibliander, if there were any subject to supply me with an occasion for writing.  When I have proceeded lower down on my journey, I will write to you more at length.  Meanwhile farewell, and may our most merciful heavenly Father grant that you may be always well, through the blood of his Son Jesus Christ our Savior: and remember, my dear friend, to persevere with energy, as you do, in your holy and dangerous warfare.  If but the least doubt of your perseverance disturbed my thoughts, I would add spurs to a running horse.  But I know you well and intimately, and doubt not but that you will in many ways surpass my expectation.  This at least I can assuredly promise myself concerning you, that, like a good shepherd, you will lay down your life for your sheep.  And I have the same persuasion respecting our learned and vigilant brother, master Gualter.  Let others talk, and extenuate, and make what excuses they please, who, when the wolf is coming, have left their sheep to be torn in pieces by thieves and robbers: unless they repent, they will wretchedly suffer the punishment of hirelings in that day when the true Shepherd shall come to separate the sheep from the goats.
    According to your singular kindness and benevolence towards me, when my amanuensis shall come to you for the purpose of writing out for me the heads of your sermons, urge him, I pray you, carefully to copy out not only your remarks on the epistle to the Romans, but also those on Isaiah and the other prophets; that I, though distant, may benefit others by the gifts of God bestowed upon you.  Will you also make the same request in my name to my masters and brethren, master Gualter and the most learned Theodore [Bibliander], men most truly esteemed by me?  I left sufficient money at Zurich, and will liberally recompense their labor if they will but comply with my entreaties.  I have desired them to forward my wishes in this respect, and to use all diligence in copying out the sermons and lectures at my expense.  Do you only, my kind friend, exhort them to this; I do not ask you to do it yourself; sufficient burdens are imposed upon your shoulders from other quarters.
    I shall say nothing as to the civility of the innkeepers from Strasburgh to this city; they are barbarous Scythians, and harsh and uncivilized Getæ.  Once more farewell.  My wife and daughter, Stumphius, Joanna, and Martin, salute you, as I do myself, with your dear wife and all your family; likewise masters Bibliander, Gualter, Pellican, excellent and most deserving men, with their families.  Moreover, I commend to Almighty God your holy church, and commonwealth, and most worthy magistrate Lavater, that he may defend you against the enemies of his name.  Mayence.  In haste.  April 8, 1549
              Yours in body and soul,
                  JOHN HOOPER.
    P. S.  Sleidan of Strasburgh has written a book of history for our king.  Doctor Andernach too, a physician of Strasburgh, has translated a work upon medicine from the Greek into Latin, and dedicated it to the archbishop of Canterbury.  you see how active all persons are in running after gain.  Beyond doubt, if there were no danger hanging over them, both our king and his kingdom would be without their favor and support.  I hear that Bernardine’s wife exhibits herself in England both in dress and appearance as a French lady of rank.  But I shall soon know more about her, and so shall you.  Respectfully salute, I pray you, the preacher from Memmingen, and also my host and hostess Zinchia.

  LETTER XXIJOHN HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  Cologne
  April 14, 1549
    Grace and innocency of life from the Lord.  If you are well, my most esteemed master and gossip, with your dear wife and family, it is well; and we are all of us by the divine mercy in good health.  I hope you have received all my letters, which gave you full information respecting the success of our journey as far as Mayence.  We arrived at Cologne on the 11th of April without any thing untoward in our voyage, except a contrary wind and rough weather.  We had however a favorable landing.  On the 8th of April two other ships suffered much more than we did, namely, shipwreck, with the total loss of their respective crews.  Two other vessels here at Cologne sustained the same misfortune during the late carnival:  in one there were twenty-eight men, and twelve in the other, not one of whom, with the exception of two sailors, escaped with life.
    I have nothing to write respecting the affairs of England, except that the gospel of Christ our Lord is daily striking root more deeply.  The admiral is dead.  He was beheaded, and divided into four quarters; with how much unwillingness he suffered death, master John Utenhovius, who is the bearer of this letter, will fully explain to you by word of mouth.  When he comes to you, receive him with that ancient kindness, which the country of Switzerland has ever manifested of her own accord towards all strangers.  He is a man illustrious both by his birth and virtues, most sincere in the true religion, and entirely opposed to all the mischiefs of sectarianism:  he is very dear both to myself and my wife, and by long habits of familiarity and intercourse exceedingly attached to us; and he is moreover exceedingly intimate with master John à Lasco.  There is no occasion for me to commend him to you more at length.  His noble qualities and remarkable learning will sufficiently recommend him to all pious and learned men.  He is coming to you on my recommendation, that he may hear your godly sermons and theological lectures, and observe the mode of administering the Lord’s supper, which as it is most simple among you, so is it most pure.  He will board with his old friend master Butler, and Englishman.  It would be foreign to my present purpose to inform you how much he has suffered from the emperor for the sake of the gospel of Christ.
    May the Lord preserve you all, your church and commonwealth!  My wife, my little daughter, Stumphius, Martin, and Joanna dutifully salute your excellency, your whole family, and all the other godly members of your church.  Cologne, April 14, 1549
            Your excellency’s most attached,
                  JOHN HOOPER.
    P.S.  I send you a compendium of the doctrine of the eucharist, which I know will much please you.  See that he [Utenhovius] be introduced to and form a friendship with masters Gualter, Pellican, Gesner and the rest.  I would write a general letter to the whole assembly of the learned men at Zurich in favor of this good brother, if I had time.

  LETTER XXJOHN HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  Antwerp
  April 26, 1549
    Much health.  Grace and innocency of life from the Lord.  How mercifully God has hitherto been present with us, and made our journey prosperous, we hope, most honored friend and gossip, you have learned from the letters written at Dietikon, Basle, Strasburgh, Mayence, and Cologne.  That which I wrote from Cologne you will receive by master John Utenhovius, an excellent and worthy man, born of an honorable family at Ghent.  We earnestly pray you to receive him with kindness.  Moreover, should there occur any mention of the holy supper of the Lord, diligently admonish and instruct him upon the subject; you will find no one more tractable, or more ready to learn.
    We left Cologne on the 14th of April, and directed our course through the barren and sandy plains of Brabant to Antwerp, where we all of us arrived, by God’s blessing, safe and sound, on the 18th of the same month.  Compelled by the entreaties of the commissioner of our king, who is now attending upon the emperor, I went over to Brussels with John Stumphius, that he might see the effeminacy and wretchedness of the court, and also the bondage of the good citizens of Brussels, who are now forced to endure the imperiousness of the Spaniards, their depredation and robbery, the violation of their daughters, the corruption of their wives, and lastly, threatenings and blows from that most profligate nation; to the end that he might more feelingly consider the state and condition of his own country, pray for it more ardently, and more earnestly warn his countrymen, and by letting them know the misfortunes of others render them more cautious.  We did not see the emperor, who very seldom leaves his chamber, nor yet his son, who was keeping Easter in some monastery out of the city.  John Stumphius saw the duke of Saxony at a window.  I was twice at his house, and very courteously entertained by his German attendants, who are about thirty in number.  The duke wished two or three times to admit me to an interview, but the presence of the Spanish general always prevented him.  He abides steadfast in the faith, and is in a very good state of health.  There is no hope whatever of his deliverance, unless, which will not I trust be the case, he should change his religion: he does not despair of the word of God.  The Landgrave of Hesse is in confinement at Oudenarde, seven miles from Ghent: he is a man thoroughly wretched and vacillating; at one time he promises all obedience and fidelity to the emperor, receives the mass and other impious idolatries with open arms; at another time he execrates and abominates the emperor, with his Interim.  May the Lord have compassion upon him! he is in a state of great wretchedness, and is now paying the just penalty of his perfidiousness.  We saw likewise that traitor Lazarus Schuendi, with whom you are acquainted.  There is no need for me to write about Brandenburg and the other Germans who are in bondage to the Spaniards.
    The pope’s legate has been preaching in his palace during the whole of Lent, with what impiety I shall not write.  This however I know for certain, that there is not a friendly feeling between the pope and the emperor, neither between the king of France and the emperor.  Both of them are greatly afraid of him, and he, in his turn, is in the greatest fear of the fulminations of the pope.  It is now seriously disputed between them, whether the general council shall be held at Trent or Bologna.  The pope urges, bids, entreats, commands the emperor to consent to Bologna.  He resists, refuses, opposes in every possible way, and says that he would rather break off all alliance with the pope, than allow of that locality, namely, Bologna.  It is easy to conjecture what mischief lies hid in this proposal on the part of the pope.  He is in great apprehension for his kingdom; for I am informed by our ambassador, that it the emperor’s confessor were but moderately religious, there would be the greatest hope of shortly bringing him into the knowledge of Christ; for he openly told me that both the emperor and all his councilors were guided, persuaded, led and dragged about by their confessor, who acts in every respect at the bidding and advice of the pope.  And I easily believe this; for when the emperor was in upper Germany seven months since, he was deserted by his confessor, because he would not act with severity against some godly persons, and restore popery altogether.  The emperor offered him a bishoprick in Spain worth twenty thousand crowns per annum.  He put a slight upon the liberality of the emperor, and upon the emperor himself, in these terms:  “I owe myself entirely to the church of Christ, but neither to you nor to your gifts, unless you choose to serve the church more zealously than you have done.
    And now as to the emperor’s views in regard to Switzerland.  All parties agree in this, that he is enviously opposed to your liberty, and will therefore leave no stone unturned to destroy your union.  Should he not succeed in this way, he will attempt every thing by promises.  Beware therefore, lest he deceive you with vain expectations.  Last of all, he will without doubt attack you with an hostile army, not with a view of overcoming you in this way, or exposing many of his troops to danger, but merely to strike terror into you.  I pray you therefore to preserve your mutual regard and unanimity:  fear God, live holily, fight bravely, and expect the victory from God, who will without doubt stand by and defend you.  People think that you are not in imminent danger at present; but still you should always be prepared against a feeling of security, lest he should overwhelm you when you little think of it.  The emperor is hitherto well aware that he cannot manage the affairs of Germany as he desires.  He has been more troubled, as I have been informed upon good authority, that he has made any alteration in religion, than if he had promised the Germans the utmost liberty in that respect.  They say that the emperor will shortly proceed to Ghent, and from thence return to Brussels, or go up towards Spires.  He has troops stationed near Bremen and the towns upon the coast, but they are inactive; they neither make any progress, nor are they much feared by the citizens, who are daily adding to the strength of their cities, and have provisions for five years, and do not any longer court the favor of the emperor.  You are, I think, aware of the severity of the exactions the emperor now demands from his subjects:  I will relate, however, an affecting and lamentable statement which a godly matron, my landlady, made to me in Brabant.  “If,” she said, “I could carry in my arms my large and troublesome family of children, I would flee away, and obtain my livelihood by begging.  For the tax-gatherers of the emperor and the queen exhaust all the fruit of our labors.”  The English too, are now sadly oppressed in this respect.  A fifth of all property has been granted to the king.  But I must tell you one more thing respecting Switzerland.  Yesterday, April 25th, I was invited to dinner by a citizen of Antwerp, who is well acquainted with Switzerland from having frequently exposed his goods to sale in all their cities.  he told me that since the emperor had left upper Germany, he had often seen in his palace the public officers of the canton of Lucerne; for he knew them well by the color of their dress.  It is to be feared that the secret affairs of that country may be revealed by this means, or that some yet greater evil may be latent.
    On the first of May there will be fresh rejoicings at Brussels in honor of the prince of Spain.  You have, I suppose, heard of the former ones from master John Utenhovius; but as he did not see the new gates and columns erected in the city, you must know that at the first gate there is a column on which is inscribed, “Happy are his subjects!”
      Quis genus Austriadum, quis stirpem Cæsaris altam
        Herculei vere generis esse negat?
    On the other side is written,
      Alcidem jactant nugæ et fictitia monstra;
        Caroleos ausus fortia gesta probant.
    On the second gate:
      Sancta fides merito collaudat vosque patresque,
        Auxilio quorum cæpit et aucta fides.
    On the other side:
      Se ter felicem hoc fausto tempore clamat,
        Prole quod Augusta vindice tuta manet.
    The third gate bears the representation of Hercules sailing with his pillars, on each of which is placed a statue of a man.  The first says, “go,” the other, “come.”  The verses are these,
      Adsit Caroleo cœlestis palma labori,
        Et maneat soli gloria prima Deo.
    Also,
      Fida lacesiti cunctatio restituit rem,
        Christicolamque fidem provehat ulterius.
    At Antwerp there is represented an eagle with expanded wings, beneath whose feet is written this impious application of scripture, “Protect us under the shadow of thy wings.”
    On the first of May, at the rejoicings at Brussels, the prince of Spain, and the son of the duke d’Arschot, a native of Brabant, engaged with spears on horseback.  Whether by chance or carelessness I know not, but the prince’s helmet was badly fastened on, and could not withstand the force of the lance of d’Arschot’s son; so that the prince was twice wounded in the face, once in the chin, the second time in the forehead, but the wounds are not dangerous.  The emperor however, in alarm, put off the tournament till the following week.
    I hear that east Friesland has received the Interim.  If this be the case, master à Lasco will soon return into England.  I greatly regret his absence, especially as Peter Martyr and Bernardine so stoutly defend Lutheranism, and there is now arrived a third, (I mean Bucer,) who will leave not stone unturned to obtain a footing.  The people of England, as I hear, all of them entertain right notions upon that subject.  Should not master à Lasco come to us in a short time, I will send him your letter with the writing.  But, if it please God, I could wish to meet the parties in person.  We have remained here a fortnight for the sake of passing over from hence into England more conveniently, with a well-informed and skillful English captain who is staying here, and waiting for a cargo.  But I am afraid lest the wind should turn against us, in which case we shall lose both our time and money.
              [JOHN HOOPER.]

  LETTER XXXI. JOHN HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  Antwerp
  May 3, 1549
    I have desired for some days to take care of the health of my wife and our little girls, who, though they were entirely exhausted by the fatigue of the journey, have now by resting tolerably recovered their strength.  You will receive with this letter a piece of cloth for hose, of a better quality than that which you bought of me before, but yet at the same or a lower price.  It contains, I suppose, at least 20 Zurich ells:  should it contain more or less, let me know in your nest letter, which I pray you to send to our old friend Richard Hilles.  It will then, I hope, be faithfully delivered to me.  Let this cloth be divided between master Mayor and yourself:  I would have sent you another piece, could I have met with any upon sale at this place.  As soon as I arrive in London I will send you some, God willing, not inferior to this, nor more expensive.  All those persons in this place who import cloth from England, sell it at a profit, and it is with difficulty that I have met with that which I now send.  They have many thousand [pieces], but they will not sell except to those who will buy ten or twenty whole pieces together, for fear of mixing the different qualities of the cloth; as the best, the middling, and the inferior, mutually help each other both in the price and the sale.  If you or the Mayor will, either of you, keep the cloth now sent, I will send a second piece to the one who shall be without it.  I bought this for forty shillings, that is, six ducats, before it was dyed.  A ducat is equivalent to forty stivers of Brabant, and forty stivers of Brabant make twenty-four batzen of Constance.  I paid for the dyeing eight shillings of Brabant, which make twenty-eight batzen of Constance, and a little over:  I do not know what I am to pay for the carriage to Strasburgh, but, exclusive of all expenses, you will have a Zurich ell for ten Zurich batzen.  If there are twenty ells, this will amount to two hundred batzen, which make eight French solar crowns, which is the price of the entire piece.  When I reach London, I may probably send you some at a less price; meanwhile take in good part my services, which I owe and shall owe you, as a father and a most esteemed master, as long as I live.  I wish this cloth to be divided between master Mayor and yourself, that when I send you another piece you may be upon an equal footing both with respect to the quality of the cloth and the price.  And if in future you should wish to wear English cloth for your coats or hose, (and state this also in my name to our brother Gualter,) I will always most willingly use my endeavors in your behalf.  And you, as you love me, see that those who are taking copies at my expense, are most carefully supplied with the notes of your sermons.  If they are not sparing in their labors, I will not be sparing of my money.  Keep in your possession the money for this cloth, until I shall let you know by letter to what use I wish it to be applied.
    My wife and all who are with me salute your reverence, your wife and all your family; and you will salute in all our names masters Gualter, Pellican, the Israelite indeed, and all the other learned and most loving brethren.  Do not moreover omit to salute with the greatest respect and honor most dutifully in my name master Mayor, to whom and to the commonwealth of Zurich I most ardently wish every happiness.  May the Lord long preserve you by his Sprit safe, pious, and sound; and may you defend the fold of Christ from wolves and hirelings until the coming of the glory of God!  Antwerp, May 3, 1549
              Yours always in mind and body,
                    JOHN HOOPER.
    P. S. Take care, I pray you, that the other letters which I send, may be delivered to those to whom they are directed.  After Easter my wife wrote to her mother, who lives about fifteen miles from Antwerp.  The messenger found her father dead.  Her mother received the letter and gave it my wife’s brother to read, who immediately threw it into the fire without reading it.  You see the words of Christ are true, that the brother shall persecute the brother for the sake of the word of God.

  LETTER XXXII. JOHN HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  London
  May 31, 1549
    Much health.  Pardon, most loving master and father, the shortness of my letter.  You will learn from our brother, master Butler, by what circumstances I am hindered, and with whom I have to contend within these two days on the subject of divorce.  In the commentaries which I lately wrote on the decalogue, I allowed both to the man and his wife an equal liberty of divorce on account of adultery, if they are disposed to use that liberty which Christ has permitted in the gospel of his church, where the marriage contract is dissolved by adultery.  My opponents allow the husband to divorce his wife by reason of adultery, and to marry another; but they do not allow the same liberty to the wife.  In your next letter, as you love me, either confirm my opinion, or correct my error.
    We are all well; I have sent John Stumphius to Oxford, recommended by many honorable men, and especially by Treherne, who is much attached to you.  When I gave your letter to the archbishop of Canterbury, he did not vouchsafe a single word respecting either yourself, or your most godly church.  Bucer has very great influence with him, and the bishop will appoint him to the regius professorship [of divinity] at Cambridge.  Master à Lasco is absent, which is a great grief to all godly persons.  I shall send your letter to him tomorrow by a good and trusty friend, together with the book and writing.  You may expect, God willing, a longer letter within the next fortnight, with which you will also receive the cloth.  My wife always makes mention of you in her prayers; she salutes you with your dear wife and all your family.  Our little daughter Rachel with Martin and Joanna do the same in spirit.  Do you, most esteemed master, salute in our names masters Gualter, Pellican, Gesner, and all the rest.  London, May 31, 1549
          Your ever most affectionate, JOHN HOOPER.

  LETTER XXXIII. JOHN HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  London
  June 25, 1549
    Much health.  I cannot express, my much honored master and gossip, the delight afforded me by your letter, a most certain token as it was of your exceeding love to me.  I earnestly entreat you to act always thus; for nothing can be more agreeable to me than to hear often of your welfare, and of the safety of your church and commonwealth.  You shall always in return receive every intelligence from me respecting my own circumstances and those of our church.  Great, great I say, my beloved master and gossip, is the harvest, but the laborers are few.  May our most indulgent Father send forth laborers into the harvest!  Such is the maliciousness and wickedness of the bishops, that the godly and learned men who would willingly labor in the Lord’s harvest are hindered by them; and they neither preach themselves, nor allow the liberty of preaching to others.  For this reason there are some persons here who read and expound the holy scriptures at a public lecture, two of whom read in St. Paul’s cathedral four times a week.  I myself too, as my slender abilities will allow me, having compassion upon the ignorance of my brethren, read a public lecture twice in the day to so numerous an audience, that the church cannot contain them.  The anabaptists flock to the place, and give me much trouble with their opinions respecting the incarnation of the Lord; for they deny altogether that Christ was born of the virgin Mary according to the flesh.  They contend that a man who is reconciled to God is without sin, and free from all stain of concupiscence, and that nothing of the old Adam remains in his nature; and a man, they say, who is thus regenerate cannot sin.  They add that all hope of pardon is taken away from those who, after having received the Holy Ghost, fall into sin.  They maintain a fatal necessity, and that beyond and besides that will of his which he has revealed to us in the scriptures, God has another will by which he altogether acts under some kind of necessity.  Although I am unable to satisfy their obstinacy, yet the Lord by his word shuts their mouths, and their heresies are more and more detested by the people.  How dangerously our England is afflicted by heresies of this kind, God only knows; I am unable indeed from sorrow of heart to express to your piety.  There are some who deny that man is endued with a soul different from that of a beast, and subject to decay.  Alas! not only are those heresies reviving among us which were formerly dead and buried, but new ones are springing up every day.  There are such libertines and wretches, who are daring enough in their conventicles not only to deny that Christ is the Messiah and Savor of the world, but also to call that blessed Seed a mischievous fellow and deceiver of the world.  On the other hand, a great portion of the kingdom so adheres to the popish faction, as altogether to set at nought God and the lawful authority of the magistrates; so that I am greatly afraid of a rebellion and civil discord.  May the Lord restrain restless spirits, and destroy the counsels of Achitophel!  Do you, my venerable father, commend our king and the council of the nation, together with our church, to God in your prayers.
    I have not yet seen my parents, but hope to do so shortly, if the Lord permit.  It has hitherto been out of my power, both because I am daily expecting my baggage with books and other necessaries, which were detained at Antwerp by an unfavorable wind; and also because through the instigation of the devil and wickedness of man there has lately arisen in my part of the country a commotion of the people against the government, not unattended with danger, and as yet hardly composed.  Tumults of this kind are taking place not only in my country, but almost throughout the whole kingdom.  The people are sorely oppressed by the marvelous tyranny of the nobility.  Let us pray that all occasions of discord may be piously removed, and that the people may be kept in order to the glory of God’s name.  The state of our country is indeed most deplorable:  we are however in expectation of a happy issue, when we shall feel pleasure in the recollection of what is past.  When I visit my friends, I will purchase for yourself and master Mayor the other cloth that I promised, and also another piece for master John Butler; I could not buy it here at your price.
    Bucer is with the archbishop of Canterbury like another Scipio, and an inseparable companion.  Paulus Fagius too, and Peter Alexander, formerly chaplain to queen Mary, the emperor’s sister, are also there.  Within a fortnight, God willing, you shall know more.  Salute very much in all our names your wife with all your family, masters Gualter and Pellican with their wives, and all the other members of your church.  I wish you were acquainted with our language, and that master Gualter also knew it for six months:  I doubt not but that God would convert many hearts to the knowledge of himself.  Farewell.  London, June 25
    I send herewith a pattern of the cloth of this kind which is manufactured either in your neighborhood or in Suabia.  You will ascertain this from the wife of master Musculus.  Ask master Butler to send me four or five florins worth, and send word how much it costs per ell.  I have often grieved over my departure from you; for the Lord has opened my eyes to perceive the sad and dangerous situation of the clergy.  I will endure it however, God willing, as long as I can do so with a pure conscience.
            Yours ever most attached,
                JOHN HOOPER.
    P.S.  My friend Martin, an excellent young man, affectionately salutes your excellency.  You will deign to salute in my name my master, your most worthy Mayor, who is on every account so respectable.  I hope you have received one piece of cloth.  You shall receive the second in a short time.

  LETTER XXXIV. JOHN HOOPER TO JOHN STUMPHIUS.
  London
  Aug. 1, 1549
    Much health.  You will receive, my very dear brother, by the bearer of this letter all your books, which I doubt not you have been long and anxiously expecting.  The party to whom I gave in charge my luggage at Strasburgh answered my expectation in this respect negligently enough.  You need not be troubled about the carriage, as I have paid both the waggones and sailors.  Should you be in want of money, you can let me know by letter every week; I will never be wanting to your necessities.  I am obliged to remain here in London and in the family of the lord protector, till things become more settled:  I tell you this, that you may know for certain where to direct your letters.  Since you left me, I have received two letters from master Bullinger, from which I learn that the affairs of Switzerland are as safe and flourishing as ever.  A letter, however, has lately reached me from Germany, which states that five cantons have lately entered upon a solemn treaty with the king of France against the English, but that the evangelical states had piously and boldly rejected it.  Do you, my brother, as your love to your country requires, aid them together with me in your diligent and persevering prayers unto the Lord; and he who has begun a godly work in the people of Zurich, will perform it even unto the end.  Farewell, and respectfully salute in my  name the wife of Peter Martyr, together with his attendant; and also John ab Ulmis, with the Hessian who lately came over to you.  I would salute my old friend master Garbrand, only that I have so often done so without any greeting in return, that I know not whether he can bear with patience to be saluted by me.  London, August 1  In haste.
            Yours ever to serve in any way,
                  JOHN HOPPER.
    You will also receive three shirts.  The fourth is still packed up among my baggage, which I have not yet unpacked.  I will send it you next week.

  LETTER XXXV. JOHN HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  London
  Nov. 7, 1549
    Much health.  The favor and blessing of God be with you!  If you have not yet received my letter, with two entire pieces of cloth, one for yourself, and the other for master Butler, you will receive them, my much esteemed master and father, in a short time.  They are detained a longer time at Antwerp on account of the dyeing; but by the blessing of God they will all safely reach you.  You must not wonder at your not having yet received the cloth; for I have been so overwhelmed by difficult and constant business since my arrival in England, that I have not yet been able either to visit my native place or my parents.
    The face of things is now changed, and the state of English affairs in some respects altered.  My patron, who was first minister and protector, is now imprisoned with many others in the Tower of London, as you will better learn from a letter which is now on the road to you.  We are greatly apprehensive of a change in religion; but as yet no alteration has taken place.  Help us in Christ by your prayers.  The young king by the mercy of God is alive and well, and is a prince of great learning and wisdom.  The papists are hoping and earnestly struggling for their kingdom.  The bishop of London, the most bitter enemy of the gospel, is now living in confinement, and deposed from his bishiprick.  This was done when the affairs and fortunes of the duke of Somerset were more prosperous than they are at present.  I had a sharp and dangerous contest with that bishop, both publicly from the pulpit, in my turns at Paul’s cross, and also before the king’s council.  Should he be again restored to his office and episcopal function, I shall, I doubt not, be restored to my country and my Father which is in heaven.  Fourteen days since silence was imposed and enjoined upon all lecturers and preachers.  But this only lasted seven days; and liberty of teaching is again allowed them.  I read in public every day to a most crowded audience at London, and take John and Daniel by turns.  I lectured upon the Psalms at the king’s court as long as the situation of the duke permitted me to do so; but that lecture is now laid aside.
    Will you kindly undertake, most reverend sir, out of your love to Christ and to myself, to have your notes on Isaiah copied out and forwarded to me with all fidelity, (for I am greatly in need of your assistance;) and also all the other comments which you have written on the other prophets, or upon the New Testament?  I know that they are all pure in doctrine, and learned, and holy.  I will satisfy the writer or copyist for his pains.  I make, too, the same request from master Gualter, and from or gossip, master Bibliander, with respect to his lectures, which are doubtless holy, pious, and full of learning.  You will receive with the cloth the disputation of Peter Martyr with the papists at Oxford on the subject of the eucharist.
    John Stumphius is well, and conducts himself with much credit: tell his parents, that should he stand in need of any assistance in any way, I will never be wanting to him.  John ab Ulmis is also in good health.  You will do well if you will admonish him by letter to pursue his studies with diligence, and remain at home.  I am afraid that by his so frequently going backwards and forwards between Oxford and London, he will incur a loss not only of time, but of money.  Use your own discretion in this matter.  In haste.  Salute all my good masters and instructors, together with all our friends and their godly wives in the name of us all.
    I entreat you most kindly to salute that excellent man, master Butler, to whom I am not now able to write a letter; and request him to give two florins in my name to the widow of the deceased Zinkius.  You will also tell this afflicted widow, that we shall all of us bear in mind, as long as we live, the kindness with which she treated us.
              Your excellence’s most attached,
                    JOHN HOOPER.

  LETTER XXXVI. JOHN HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER
  London
  Dec. 27, 1549
    That you so seldom receive any letter from me, my very reverend master and gossip, I pray you to ascribe to the calamity of our time, and the alteration in my circumstances, rather than to any forgetfulness of your signal courtesy and kindness, which both reason and affection entirely forbid on my part.
    We were in much alarm, and very great fear possessed the minds of the godly, as to the success that the religion of Christ just now budding forth in England would meet with upon the fall of the duke of Somerset, who is still confined in the Tower of London.  We have as yet no certain information as to what will become of him.  We hope that his life will be spared.  May God grant this for the glory of his name, and the benefit of his church! although we see many dangers hanging over him, yet we hope and expect a favorable issue.  We easily indeed give credit to what we wish.
    No change in religion has taken place among us, and we hope that no alteration will be made hereafter.  Although our vessel is dangerously tossed about on all aides, yet God in his providence holds the helm, and raises up more favorers of his words in his majesty’s councils, who with activity and courage defend the cause of Christ.  The archbishop of Canterbury entertains right view as to the nature of Christ’s presence in the supper, and is now very friendly towards myself.  He has some articles of religion, to which all preachers and lecturers in divinity are required to subscribe, or else a license for teaching is not granted them; and in these his sentiments respecting the eucharist are pure, and religious, and similar to yours in Switzerland.  We desire nothing more for him than a firm and manly spirit.  Like all the other bishops in this country, he is too fearful about what may happen to me.  There are here six or seven bishops who comprehend the doctrine of Christ as far as relates to the Lord’s supper, with as much clearness and piety as one could desire; and it is only the fear for their property that prevents them from reforming their churches according to the rule of God’s word.  The altars are here in many churches changed into tables.  The public celebration of the Lord’s supper is very far from the order and institution of our Lord.  Although it is administered in both kinds, yet in some places the supper is celebrated three times a day.  Where they used heretofore to celebrate in the morning the mass of the apostles, they now have the communion of the apostles; where they had the mass of the blessed virgin, they now have the communion which they call the communion of virgin; where they had the principal, or high mass, they now have, as they call it, the high communion.  They still retain their vestments and the candles before the altars; in the churches they always chant the hours and other hymns relating to the Lord’s supper, but in our own language.  And that popery may not be lost, the mass-priests, although they are compelled to discontinue the use of the Latin language, yet most carefully observe the same tone and manner of chanting to which they were heretofore accustomed in the papcy.  God knows to what perils and anxieties we are exposed by reason of men of this kind.
    You will apologize for me to master Mayor, and also to master Butler, respecting the pieces of cloth.  Three months have elapsed since I sent them off, but they are detained at Antwerp; they will shortly, however, be delivered to you, God willing, and possibly before the receipt of this letter.  I have just come from my lecture; I pray you therefore to interpret with kindness the shortness of my letter.  I am obliged to lecture in public twice a day both tomorrow and the day following.  May it be for the glory of God!  I shall finish the sixth chapter of John, and have proceeded thus far upon that evangelist.  For my other lecture I expound Daniel, as affording a subject well-suited to our times; and I am now engaged in considering the third beast in the seventh chapter, towards the elucidation of which subject your remarks and annotations upon Daniel have contributed no small assistance.
    I pray you, most reverend sir, by your great regard for me, to take care that all your annotations, especially those on Isaiah, be copied out with all speed, and sent to me with the greatest care.  I will pay every expense: you know not how wonderfully they promote the glory of God.  If I am able to effect anything, and my slender powers are of any benefit to the church of Christ, I confess, and by the blessing of God will confess, as long as I live, that I owe it to yourself and my masters and brethren at Zurich; whom I pray the Lord ever to preserve in safety for his name’s sake.  Moreover, if you have any thing which you purpose soon to send to the press, you should dedicate it to our most excellent sovereign, king Edward the sixth.  On this subject I wish you would advise those learned men, namely, master Bibliander, our co-sponsor, and master Gualter.  If you will comply with my wishes in this respect, you will advance the glory of God in no small degree.  Believe me, all the English, who are free from popish tyranny and Romish craftiness, entertain correct views respecting the [Lord’s] supper.
    There are various other reasons which induce me to make this request to you; but I cannot at present state them by reason of the danger of the journey.  Be alive, fight with that old serpent.  Behold, your reward is great in heaven.
    Salute masters Bibliander, Gualter, Pellican, with their wives, my most faithful master Butler with his wife, and all my other Zurich friends so much esteemed by me.  Tell my excellent friend, master Gessner, that there is on the road for him a Welsh dictionary, and some writings in the language of Cornubia, commonly called Cornwall.
            Yours now and for evermore,
                JOHN HOOPER.
    P. S.  My wife and your little god-daughter, Rachel, together with Martin and Joanna, salute your excellence with the good lady our gossip, your wife, and master Bibliander with his wife, our very dear gossips, and all the rest.
    Rachel is endued with a most happy memory, and retains with the greatest facility every thing that is said to her, and of all other languages she best understands the Latin.

  LETTER XXXVII. JOHN HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  London
  Feb. 5, 1550
    Greeting.  I much regret, most esteemed master and gossip, that the two letters which I sent you at the feast of St. John the Baptist, are, as I understand from your letter, either intercepted or lost.  Had they reached your excellency, you would neither have been ignorant of my present circumstances, nor of my affection towards you.  I am, however, entirely persuaded of this, that we are united in such bonds of friendship as neither the miscarriage, nor even the intermission, of our correspondence will ever be able to break.  But henceforth, God willing, I will make amends for my blameable silence by my diligence in writing.  As far as I know, the letters of my wife to our very dear gossips, the wives of yourself and of our gossip master Bibliander, have not been delivered; or you would at least have learned from them the situation both of myself and of this kingdom.  But as I now promise in this respect greater zeal and diligence than I have hitherto used, I trust to your kindness to forgive me.  I will not now allege the just excuse, that the difficult and dangerous nature of my labors, very reverend sir, would call for at your hands; but proceed at once to comply with your injunctions.  First of all, then, receive in a few words what relates to myself.  Since my return to England, I have neither seen my native place nor my parents, by reason of the frequent and dangerous commotions stirred up in those parts on account of religion, and which indeed are not yet calmly and quietly settled.  May God send a better state of things!  My father is yet living in ignorance of the true religion, but I hope that the grace of God will at length teach him better.  I have been explaining the holy scriptures here at London, and sometimes at court, by order of the duke of Somerset.  In the city I have finished the epistle to Titus and about seven chapters of John.  At court I have been lecturing upon the Psalms, and God knows at what risk I interpreted the sixth chapter of St. John.   I am also occupied at this time with the latter part of the seventh chapter of Daniel.  I thought it best to explain the sixth of John and the seventh of Daniel by turns, that the people might rightly discern Christ from the one, and antichrist from the other.  Thus much, then, respecting myself.  My wife always remembers you in her prayers, that she may repay what she owes to your kindness:  her health is not what it formerly was at Zurich, but is affected by the air of England and the relaxing nature of our climate.  Our little Rachel is making progress both in body and mind.  She understand the English, German, French and Latin languages very tolerably, and especially the Latin.
    While I was writing this, namely on the fifth of February, on which day I received your last, the archbishop of Canterbury sent for me, and ordered me in the name of the king and council to preach before his majesty (who is now at London, and will not go anywhere else before Easter) once a week during the ensuing Lent.  May the Lord open my heart and mouth, that I may think and speak those things which may advance his kingdom!  I shall make choice, I think, of a very suitable subject, namely, the prophet Jonas; which will enable me freely to touch upon the duties of individuals.  Do you, my reverend friend, write back as soon as possible, and diligently instruct me as to what you think may conveniently be said in so crowded an auditory.  it must necessarily be great when before the king; for even in the city there is such a concourse of people at my lectures, that very often the church will not hold them.
    Now as to what is doing in England.  The bishops of Canterbury, Rochester, Ely, St. David’s, Lincoln, and Bath, are all favorable to the cause of Christ; and, as far as I know, entertain right opinions in the matter of the eucharist I have freely conversed with all of them upon this subject, and have discovered nothing but what is pure and holy.  The archbishop of Canterbury, who is at the head of the king’s council, gives to all lecturers and preachers their license to read and preach: every one of them, however, must previously subscribe to certain articles, which, if possible, I will send you; one of which, respecting the eucharist, is plainly the true one, and that which you maintain in Switzerland.  The marquis of Dorset, the earl of Warwick, and the greater part of the king’s council favor the cause of Christ as much as they can.  Our king is such an one for his age as the world has never seen.  May the Lord preserve him!  His sister, the daughter of the late king by queen Ann, is inflamed with the same zeal for the religion of Christ.  She not only knows what the true religion is, but has acquired such proficiency in Greek and Latin, that she is able to defend it by the most just arguments and the most happy talent; so that she encounters few adversaries whom she does not overcome.  The people however, that many-headed monster, is still wincing; partly through ignorance, and partly fascinated by the inveiglements of the bishops, and the malice and impiety of the mass-priests.
    Such then is the present state of things in England.  Receive thus much concerning the affairs of government.  On the sixth of October the king, together with the protector, fled from the palace, which we commonly call Hampton-court, to another castle, called in our language Windsor, for this reason, that the other members of the council in London had determined, as it was right they should, to make inquiry into the protector’s conduct.  Large numbers were collected by each party.  As to my self, I determined not to interfere, because I had great enemies on both sides.  The king was accompanied in his flight by his uncle the duke of Somerset, the archbishop of Canterbury, the comptroller of the household, and some of the lords of the bedchamber.  All the other nobility and men of rank had lent their influence to the council, who conducted this affair in London:  however, by the mercy of God, the business was at length settled without bloodshed.  On the 14th of October the duke of Somerset with some others was sent to the Tower of London, from whence he is not yet come out; but by the blessing of God he will be set at liberty, either this evening or tomorrow.  Be not alarmed at Dryander’s returning to you; he consults his own interests, and cares but little for ours when gain is out of the question.  Master Cox has received with the greatest respect your letter and present: I suppose you have received an answer from him before this time.
    The archbishop of Canterbury, to say the truth, neither took much notice of your letter, nor of your learned present.  But now, as I hope, master Bullinger and Canterbury entertain the same opinions.  Should it be otherwise, you shall shortly hear.
    With respect to what you write about the marquis of Dorset, if you have anything suitable in the press, contrive, I entreat you, to dedicate it to him.  He is pious, good, and brave, and distinguished in the cause of Christ.  You will not a little advance the glory of God by giving encouragement to him and others by your writings.  Your reputation, believe me, is most honorably spoken of, as you well deserve, by all the learned and godly of this country.  Take in good part the unpolished style of my letter.  After some days you shall hear more.  London.  February 5, 1550
            Yours ever,
              JOHN HOOPER.
    P.S.  You will remind master Gualter, Bibliander and my other Zurich friends, that if they are about to print any religious work, they should dedicate it either to our kind, a most excellent and learned youth, or to some one or other of the nobility.  I charge and enjoin you, my most learned gossip, and every way most esteemed master, to send me something of yours in print for our king.  I will take care that the work shall come to his hands, and that the offering shall not want a commendation from myself.
    I entreat you not to mention this letter to any one.  I would write, as I ought to do, to masters Bibliander and Butler; but God knows I have no time.  I wish you all every happiness.  In three days time I will write again.  You shall hear in a few days respecting the Interim and other matters.  The duke of Somerset will now come out of the Tower, and many other persons will be sent thither, whom I am not now at liberty to mention.

  LETTER XXXVIII. JOHN HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  London
  March 27, 1550
    Grace and innocence of life from the Lord!  That I may in some measure extenuate, if I cannot entirely excuse, my blameable neglect of correspondence, (touching which, my much esteemed master and most loving gossip, you so deservedly and severely expostulated with me in your last letter,) this is the third letter that I have taken care should be sent you by the post since the end of January.  I hope that you have received the others, and that you will receive this with all possible speed.  I have already informed your excellence both as to my individual circumstances, and the news of this kingdom; but lest my letters should have been lost on the road, as has very often happened heretofore on both sides through the carelessness, or rather the dishonesty, of the courier, I think it worth my while to repeat the leading particulars in a few words.
    Concerning me and mine, with whom you are acquainted, I wrote that we are all of us in good health.  My wife however is weak and valetudinarian as usual, but, by the blessing of God, in no danger of her life.  Rachel, by the mercy of God, is in the enjoyment of excellent health:  she grows both in stature and in talent, and holds out the best promise of a most happy memory.  She understands no language so well as she does Latin.  I have not yet visited my native place; being prevented, partly by the danger of the rebellion and tumult in those quarters, and partly by the command of the king that I should advance the kingdom of Christ here at London: nor indeed am I yet able to stir even a single mile from the city without a numerous attendance.  I comfort myself however in this, that the employment on which I had entered under [un]promising and difficult auspices is blessed by God every day more and more; and he has given a sufficiently large and glorious increase to the seed sown by Peter and Paul.  We do not water and plant in vain.  May the name of the Lord be for ever blessed!  But there has lately been appointed a new bishop of London, a pious and learned man, if only his new dignity do not change his conduct.  He will, I hope, destroy the altars of Baal, as he did heretofore in his church when he was bishop of Rochester.  I can scarcely express to you, my very dear friend, under what difficulties and dangers we are laboring and struggling, that the idol of the mass may be thrown out.  It is no small hindrance to our exertions, that the form which our senate or parliament, as we commonly call it, has prescribed for the whole realm, is so very defective and of doubtful construction, and in some respects indeed manifestly impious.  I sent it to our friend, master Butler, about four months since.  I am so much offended with that book, and that not without abundant reason, that if it be not corrected, I neither can nor will communicate with the church in the administration of the [Lord’s] supper.  Many altars have been destroyed in this city since I arrived here.  I commenced with the epistle to Titus, having finished which, I lectured on the gospel of St. John, and am now engaged upon the eighth chapter.  I freely held forth upon the sixth chapter to my audience, as God enabled me, respecting the Lord’s supper, for the space of three months, and lectured once or twice every day; and it pleased God to bless my exertions.  A wonderful and most numerous concourse of people attended me, and God was with them; for he opened their hearts to understand the things that were spoken by me.  But I incurred great odium and not less danger from the sixth chapter.  The better cause however prevails; and during this Lent I have plainly and openly handled the same subject before the king and the nobility of the realm.  In this city an individual of the name of Crome, a man of excellent erudition and holiness of life, a doctor in divinity, and well known to master Butler, is combating my opinions in a public discourse.
    The bishop of Westchester will preach on Good Friday and will deliver his sentiments upon the [Lord’s] supper, the invocation of the saints, and the authority of the scriptures.  God grant that he may teach the truth!  We all piously agreed in the same opinion respecting all the articles, in the presence of the king, this Lent; I will let you know the result immediately after Easter.
    The bishops of Winchester, London, and Worcester are still in confinement, and maintain the popish doctrines with all their might.  The bishop of Winchester, who is a prisoner in the Tower of London, came forward and challenged me to a disputation about a month since:  he doubtless assured himself of a glorious victory; should he fail in obtaining which, he would submit himself to the laws and to the king for punishment.  The keeper of the prison had at first accepted the conditions.  The day was fixed.  But when the bishop knew for certain that I would not shrink from that duty, but that I would firmly maintain the best of causes even at the peril of my life, he changed his mind, and said, that if the king would set him at liberty, he would take his part in a disputation, in full reliance on the help of God, that he should obtain the victory.  What will at length be done I know not.  Meantime let us pray that God may be present with us, and that we may fearlessly advance his glory.
    A book has lately been published here by the bishops, touching the ordination and consecration of the bishops and ministers of the church.  I have sent it to master Butler, that you may know their fraud and artifices, by which they promote the kingdom of antichrist, especially in the form of the oath; against which form I brought forward many objections in my public lecture before the king and the nobility of the realm: on which account I have incurred no small hostility.  On the fourth day after the lecture an accusation was brought against me before the council by the archbishop of Canterbury.  I appeared before them.  The archbishop spoke against me with great severity on account of my having censured the form of the oath.  I entreated the judges to hear with impartiality upon what authority I had done so.  The question was long and sharply agitated between the bishops and my self; but at length the end and issue was for the glory of God.
    If the ensuing summer should be free from disturbances, we hope for much good to our church; for peace is arranged between us and the French, but I am not yet informed upon what terms.  I only pray our great and gracious God, that war may not lie hid under the name of peace.  The day before I wrote this letter to your excellence, the emperor sent two most beautiful Spanish horses as a present to our king.  On the same day a German Lutheran sent to [Sir John] Cheke, the king’s tutor, a book which has lately come forth against the anabaptists and sacramentaries: he gave the book to the king to read, but it nowise pleased either the king, or his tutors, namely, Cook and Cheke, both of whom, as well as the king, have a pious understanding of the doctrine of the eucharist.  master Bucer is now lying dangerously ill at Cambridge.  The subject of his lecture is the epistle to the Ephesians, and of his sermon, on holy-days, the sixth chapter of St. John. Master Valerandus has recommended him by letter not to raise any controversy on the matter of the eucharist.  He replied that he should teach nothing contrary to the opinion of Peter Martyr, which I sent you in manuscript about the middle of January.
    Touching the Interim, (you know what I mean) I have not hitherto been able by any entreaties to obtain permission for committing it to the press; but I shall probably in a few days meet the king upon business, and I will give it him for his perusal.  Believe me, my much esteemed friend, you have never seen in the world for these thousand years so much erudition united with piety and sweetness of disposition.  Should he live and grow up with these virtues, he will be a terror to all the sovereigns of the earth.  He receives with his own hand a copy of every sermon that he hears, and most diligently requires an account of them after dinner from those who study with him.  Many of the boys and youths who are his companions in study are well and faithfully instructed in the fear of God, and in good learning.  Master Cox is no longer the king’s tutor.  He still remains almoner, is much attached to you, and (as I have often told you before) most warmly thanked you for your present.  You know how it was received by the archbishop of Canterbury.  Now however, as far as I know, he has become my friend.  The marquis of Dorset sends his best regards to your reverence.  I could wish that you would dedicate either to the king or to him the work you are shortly about to publish.  Moreover, if our excellent and most learned friend, master Bibliander, or that learned and most faithful minister of Christ, master Gualter, are about to publish any thing, let them also dedicate it either to the king, or to the duke of Somerset, the king’s uncle, my patron, (who is now living at Sion, eight miles from London, and in good health, but not at present one of the king’s council, though I doubt not but that he will be shortly,) or to the marquis of Dorset, or to that most faithful and intrepid soldier of Christ, the earl of Warwick.  He is ill at this time, but I hope in no imminent danger: unless he had been on my side in the cause of Christ, it would have been all over with me five months since, when the duke of Somerset was in such difficulties.  Traheron is well; I think you have received a letter from him not long since.  Your dictations on Isaiah, which you gave in charge to Christopher Hales, have not been delivered to me.  I must make allowance for the misfortune of the man; for when he was sailing from Calais to England he was in so much danger from the French, that they threw all the ship’s cargo overboard.  I entreat you to have a new copy made with all speed, not only of [your notes] on Isaiah, but also of those upon the books of Kings; and I will satisfy both by prayers and payment the labors of the copyist.  Do not send me any thing for the cloth, which I hear you have received; but, as you love me, pay for what I am now asking from you out of the price of the cloth, and also for what I may request from you in future, until you shall hear further from me.  But I wish to inform you upon this point, that when you write to me in future, you may enclose your letter to me either in the letters of Richard Hilles or John Stumphius, or else they will scarcely ever come to my hands; such is the envy and hatred of some parties, that if they see a letter addressed to me they will retain it.  Unless therefore you should meet with a trustworthy courier, it will be necessary to suppress what otherwise ought not to be concealed.  Such is now-a-days the perverseness of men’s temper, that they can interpret nothing with an upright and unprejudiced mind.  Let me know how many letters you have received from me since the first of January.  I do not ask this, as though there would arise any danger either to your reverence or myself from the loss of the letters.  I value it not a rush, into whosoever hands they may have fallen; but I wish to know, that I may learn to estimate the trustiness of the bearer in future.  If you would sometime, as is befitting your erudition and piety, send a letter of encouragement to our king, take care to do so as soon as possible, and also to the earl of Warwick and the marquis of Dorset:  believe me, they would receive it most gratefully; send it to me, and I will place it in their hands with all fidelity.
    The worshipful the Mayor will soon, I hope, receive another good piece of cloth at the usual price, namely, ten Zurich batzen the ell.  Master Butler will also receive one, partly white, and partly black.  We thank you very much for the present which you sent to your [god-daughter] Rachel.  In return, I faithfully promise you in Christ that, as long as I live, your children shall be to me as my own, if I can in any respect be of use to them.  John Stumphius is residing very creditably and studiously at Oxford.  You may, if you please, in your letters apply a stimulus by way of exciting him to persevere honorably in what he has undertaken.  Should he be in need of any thing, I shall always be ready to assist him.  There is no occasion for his parents to be anxious about him in any way.  Salute them in my name and in that of my wife.  John Stumphius is a great favorite with her.  John ab Ulmis is also well, and, as I hear, very diligent in his studies.  He has been munificently and honorable presented, by the marquis of Dorset, with a yearly stipend of thirty crowns.  Salute most dutifully in all our names the lady your wife with all your family, and masters Bibliander, Gualter, Pellican, Otto, Frisius, and Sebastian, with their respective wives.  Martin Micronius wishes dutifully to salute your excellence and all his other friends at Zurich.  I heartily salute master Haller, the most faithful minister of the church at Berne, and master Musculus.  When you write to master Ambrose Blauer, and master Thomas his brother, salute each of them in my name.  May the Lord Jesus preserve your church and commonwealth, that you may live in peace, fear, and holiness all the days of your life!  Day and night do I remember you in my prayers, that God may guide, strengthen, and defend you by his holy Spirit against the snares of the devil and of the world.  Do you also remember me and my labors in the Lord’s vineyard: by the help of your prayers I shall raise a more glorious trophy in the church of God over our adversaries.  With the exception of the church of Zurich, and those which agree with it in religion, the word is in no part of the world preached more purely than in England.
    Write back, I pray you, immediately, if only one or two lines; for until I hear from you, I shall think that this letter also has been lost on the road.  If you will always ask master Burcher to send your letters by the post, I will pay the expense.  I desire to salute master Mayor, who is a man of God, most dutifully and affectionately in the bowels of Jesus Christ.
    A certain native of Zurich, by name Valentine Wormulus, is detained here in prison: he is, if I mistake not, related to master Otho, the minister of the church of Zurich.  I do not yet know for certain the cause of his imprisonment: whether he offered violence to a woman, or obtained her consent, I am not informed, but some offence of this sort is alleged against him; besides which, he is charged with having stolen a small sum of money.  I shall send to-day to the prison, that I may learn more by means of master Utenhovius.  I wish you would shortly let me know whether he is a native of Zurich or not.  If the law can be satisfied by a pecuniary penalty, I will willingly pay it, as soon as your reverence shall authorize me to do so, provided the money be repaid me  at Zurich.  Farewell, most honored master, and continue to love me.  London, March 27, 1550
    On Wednesday next, God willing, I shall finish my exposition of the prophet Jonas before the king.
          Yours ever,
            JOHN HOOPER.
    P.S.  Master Utenhovius dutifully salutes your worship, and doubtless aids you all in his diligent prayers to God.  You would be quite astonished, did you know how many times he has thanked me for having sent him to Zurich.  There is one request I have to make of you, my most faithful friend, that when you have read this, you will write to master Cœlius the younger, who resides at Basle, and apologize to him for my not writing to him at present.  I wrote some time since, and gave him intelligence respecting all the things that he had entrusted to my confidence; nor have I ever been unmindful of him, as he will know from me next Easter.  I have exerted myself in his favor, as you shall hereafter know.  Entreat him to persevere in his purpose, and not to be afraid.  God liveth, from whom he will successfully obtain what he desires.  Salute the widow, my landlady, in my name; and should she be in need of any thing, I shall not be unmindful of the kindness with which she treated me during my sojourn with you.

  LETTER XXXIBISHOP HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  London
  June 29, 1950
    Greeting.  The letter which you wrote on the 13th of March, I received at London on the last day of April, by which I fully understood your ancient and fatherly affection towards me.  I rejoiced much [to learn] that you and your church are regaining your former influence and reputation; but am much grieved to hear that my letters written so frequently and with so much pains have been lost on the road.  I will in future inquire ore carefully as to the trustworthiness of the messenger.  I cannot too sufficiently wonder that master Butler has so seldom heard from me.  I have frequently written to him respecting his brother-in-law, who not only holds an honorable employment at court, but most honorably defends the cause of Christ in the palace; nor is there any individual who is more fervent in this cause, or more ardent in imparting to others the word of God.  he is one of the four stewards of the royal household.  His deceased wife, who was master Butler’s sister, went to heaven a year ago; and he has now married another pious and godly virgin, of honorable rank and lineage.  He dutifully salutes master Butler, and promises to exert himself to the utmost of his power, if he should any way require his services.  Let master Butler know this.
    I now return to the course and tenor of your former letter, that I may reply to each head in its turn.  First of all, receive this intelligence concerning me and mine.  We are all of us in good health.  I had an opportunity of visiting my native place and my parents for a fortnight at the Whitsun holidays.  I found my father still alive, and though not a friend to the gospel, yet not an enemy to it.  My uncle also I found still living, and a favorer of the cause of God; and my native country, considering the extent of its population, apt and docile.  We must pray God to send forth laborers into his harvest.  Having returned to London on the fourteenth day, I am going, by the king’s command, tomorrow or the next day into Kent and Essex, to the lord chancellor of the realm, who is now, for various reasons, residing in the country.  That district is troubled with the frenzy of the anabaptists more than any other part of the kingdom.  May the Lord assist me, that my efforts there may be attended with success!  At Easter, after the sermons were ended which master Ponet and myself preached before the king and council, he on the Friday, and I on the Wednesday, during Lent, it pleased his majesty and the council to offer the bishoprick of Rochester to Ponet, and that of Gloucester to myself.  On many accounts I declined mine, both by reason of the shameful and impious form of the oath, which all who choose to undertake the function of a bishop are compelled to put up with, and also on account of those Aaronic habits which they still retain in that calling, and are used to wear, not only at the administration of the sacraments, but also at public prayers.  All these things came to the ears of the king, and he wished to know the reason of my having refused to serve God in so pious and holy a calling.  He understood that the causes which I have mentioned above altogether withdrew me from it.  On last Ascension-day I was summoned before the whole council to state my reasons, that it might be seen whether I could justly and lawfully decline the royal favor.  The matter was seriously agitated in the way of interrogatory.  At last, for the glory of God, the discussion ended to the satisfaction of myself and that of all godly persons, not through my instrumentality alone, but by the grace of God, and the favorable inclinations of the council, and their love for God and for the purity and comeliness of the rising church.  But you will say, I do not yet know the result.  It was such as to set me clear from all defilement of superstition and from the imposition of the oath.  On these terms I took upon myself the charge committed to me.  Aid wretched me with your prayers, that I may diligently and truly seek the glory of God, lest that little flock should perish, for which Christ died.
    I will not at present write much respecting myself, except only to inform your excellence, that I am now occupied upon the tenth chapter of St. John, for my lecture in the New Testament, and upon the fourth chapter of Zechariah for my lecture in the Old Testament.  I have finished Daniel, and also Jonah and his interpreter Nahum.  I shall proceed as I can; and I can do all things through Christ who strengtheneth me.  Unless his loving kindness had assisted me, I should very often have looked back from the plough, since I begun.  I could not have imagined that the office or preaching was exposed to so many and such painful anxieties.  The agreement of Calvin and yourself touching the [Lord’s] supper, and the n which the new-year’s gift was enclosed for your little daughter Rachel, (for I so call her, as your sons and daughters are mine,) I have received, and replied to each.  The marquis of Northampton, a man active in the cause of Christ, laid before the king’s majesty, in my presence, your book that was intended for him, together with your letter.  I should have presented it myself, had it not been forbidden by our laws for any one to lay before the king either a letter or anything else brought from foreign parts, without previously making it known to the council; and this law no one may dare to violate, until the king shall have arrived at the steadiness of mature age.  But as far as relates to your letter and your book, he received them with the greatest courtesy and kindness, and not without many thanks; for he most earnestly inquired both respecting yourself and the welfare of your church.  He moreover ordered the marquis to send you a royal present in token of his good-will.  As soon as I understood this, I desired the marquis to thank his majesty in your name, and that you would esteem it a sufficient token of his gratitude, if he would himself actively and piously bestow his exertions on the vineyard of Christ; besides, that you were not in the habit of receiving presents from any one; and lastly, that it was forbidden by your municipal laws to receive gifts from princes or any other persons whatsoever: but if he wished to testify his approbation either by a letter from himself or through me, that an act of this kind would be most gratifying to you.  The king then ordered me to salute you on every account in his name, and present his thanks, entreating you to remember him in your prayers, and to commend to God both himself and his kingdom.  Master Cox also, whom, having been engaged in other matters of importance, I have not been able to call upon for many weeks, received your present in the same spirit.  I have dutifully saluted all the earls and marquises in your name.  They all salute you in return.  The earl of Warwick has had a long illness, but by the blessing of God is now recovered, and will be present at the council on Wednesday next.  To tell the truth, England cannot do without him.  He is a most holy and fearless instrument of the word of God.  May the Lord strengthen him!  We have many other excellent councilors, the duke of Somerset, the marquises of Northampton and Dorset.  [The archbishop of] Cantebury has relaxed much of his Lutheranism, (whether all of it, I cannot say;) he is not so decided as I could wish, and dares not, I fear, assert his opinion in all respects.  As to your advice in your letter, that I should make friends of the bishops, I should be much to blame, if I did not endeavor by all means to do so, provided it can be done with a safe and pure conscience; and to speak the truth, there are six or seven who altogether desire and wish to promote the glory of God.  These I venerate and reverence from my heart.
    Now I most earnestly entreat you kindly to comply with the following request.  If you can procure from master Froschover at the trade price, that is, the price at which he sells them to the booksellers in sheets, all the works of Zuinglius, your own, those of Bibliander, Pellican, Gualter, Œcolampadius, Gesner, both his Bibliotheca and the treatise on Birds, which he is now reported to be writing, you will exceedingly oblige me; and as soon as I know that he has agreed to this, I will take care that he shall have the money at the next Frankfort fair, nor will I require the books till the amount is previously paid.  I request you also to salute dutifully in my name master Cœlius Secundus, whom I have constantly borne in mind since my arrival here, although I have not told him as much by letter; and let me know, when you write next, what are his present circumstances at Basle:  I know him to be a man of profound learning, and one of whose services I would gladly avail myself, when I come to know the state of my bishoprick.  As primitive antiquity employed the revenues arising from this office to the edification of the church and the education of the young, I could wish each of these objects to be restored by me, which can in no way be effected unless I shall be aided by the assistance of pious and learned men.  On this subject I would gladly hear and follow your advice.  Send me therefore by letter, as soon as possible, an answer to my inquiries.  For I know you to be discreet and attached to me, and besides this, one who is well able to look forward to the future.
    I doubt not but that the cloth sent to master Mayor and master Butler has reached you long since.  I request that your notes on Isaiah, on the books of Kings, and on the epistle to the Romans, from the beginning of the thirteenth chapter to the end, may be copied out for me as soon as possible.  I will recompense the copyist, and will not be unmindful of the kindness of master Haller, for his having taken so much trouble for me before with respect to Isaiah.  you here have the proper form of dedication of your book to the marquis of Dorset: when I return from the lord chancellor a fortnight hence, I will send the style of the earl of Warwick and the marquis of Northampton; you shall then receive farther and more certain intelligence.  Meanwhile I pray the Lord to preserve you in prosperity, together with your whole family and the church; and I congratulate you and your daughters on so happy and, I hope, so holy a marriage.  My wife and Rachel pray for you all happiness in Christ.  Make my apologies to masters Butler, Bibliander, and Gualter, for not now writing to them.  The trustworthy bearer will assign weighty reasons for this.  Do you, my most honored master and most loving friend, take in good part what I have now written with a hasty pen.  I will write more in a few days.  Your most wished for and delightful letter of the seventeenth of May I received on the 25th of June, and will reply to it in my next letter.  Live and fare well in Christ long and holily.  London, June 29 1550
          Your reverence’s most devoted,
                JOHN HOOPER.

  LETTER XL. BISHOP HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  Gloucester
  Aug. 1, 1551
    Grace and peace from the Lord!  I am not only aware, my much honored gossip, that this long silence of mine is displeasing to your kindness, but I am also greatly displeased with myself for that very reason.  But when you are acquainted with the arduous and important nature of my engagements, you will easily be induced to excuse me, and I shall free myself from the reproach of ingratitude to so dear a friend.  But although, as your letter states, as well as that of my brother and singular good friend, master John butler, I have suffered all those who have visited you from England to quit this country without any letters from myself, I have, nevertheless, written them to you very frequently; but for their having either been intercepted or lost on the road, I must blame the carelessness of the couriers, who have not only disappointed my labors, but also deceived the expectation of my best friend.  And yet, if I have written to you less frequently than your exceeding kindness to me has deserved, it has not, my most learned gossip, arisen from forgetfulness of you, but from the difficulty and magnitude of my engagements.  I was occupied during the past year with constant and important business, as you have doubtless heard from others.  The question respecting the habits, which was always exceedingly displeasing to me, was gravely discussed between the bishop of London and myself.  For my part, I very properly, if I am not mistaken, found fault with the use of them in the church, and contended for their entire removal.  He, on the other hand, most urgently and pertinaciously defended their use.  But as the Lord has put an end to this controversy, I do not think it worth while to violate the sepulchre of this unhappy tragedy.  In future, even if my engagements should not admit of any cessation, I will perform my duty in writing to you, and will not suffer any person to go from me to you without a letter.  As I now rely upon the readiness to forgive, which is a part of your character, I shall desist from offering any further apology for my silence.
    My whole family is well, as I hope also that yours is, and I daily pray God that they may both long continue so.  You must know however, that I have had no addition to my family since the time that I quitted your godly society.  If the Lord will preserve my little daughter Rachel, so that she may embrace his Son Jesus Christ, and promote his cause, I shall think my desires abundantly accomplished in my old age, even though I should have no more family.  She very frequently hears from her mother the great commendation of the country and place where she was born; and she is with great care and diligence instructed in the promises which she formerly made to the church by means of your kindness and that of the wife of master Bibliander.  She sorely complains of my not more frequently saluting by letter so holy a church and such faithful ministers of Christ.  She now sends an entire piece of cloth as a token of her reverence and respect, one half to yourself, the other to the wife of master Bibliander; and she heartily thanks her heavenly Father, that by you as her sponsors she has been received into the society of his holy church.  Should it seem good to you that your sons should visit England for their education, you need not feel much anxiety as to what it would cost them to live here.  I will take the charge of them upon myself, and that too, faithfully and cheerfully.
    I have never been able to procure the printing of those writings of yours (you know what I mean) which I brought away with me from Zurich: not that they are unacceptable to godly and learned men, for they are exceedingly acceptable to all to whom I have given them for perusal; but it has been prevented by the calamity of the time, or rather by the timidity of men who prefer their own counsels to the glory of God.  Many persons of learning and rank desired to read that book, and I allowed them to do so, as it was right I should; and it is now in the hands of master Cecil, his majesty’s principal secretary, a man endowed with very great learning and piety, and a great favorer of the gospel.  Your other books, which you sent to the king’s majesty, I delivered most carefully to the marquis of Northampton, the lord high chamberlain of England, to lay before the king in your name, which he did carefully and readily, and the king ordered him to salute you in return with many thanks; nor do I doubt but that the king will always remember you in future.  I request that you will in your turn commend him for his godly procedure, and always in your letters exhort him to perseverance in it.  For the king reads your letters with attention, and takes a most lively interest in the perusal.  You must not therefore think your labor ill-bestowed, although you do not receive an answer.  My lord of Canterbury, who is in truth a great admirer of you, when I received your last n his palace, and acquainted him with its contents, could hardly refrain from tears, when he understood your feelings in regard to the king and to the kingdom, and also the perseverance of your church in these most lamentable times.  He made most honorable mention both of yourself and of your profound erudition.  You have no one, I am sure, among all your dearest friends, who is more interested about you, and who loves you in Christ more ardently than he does.  I know of a truth that he loves you from his heart.  In my conversation with him I requested his kind offices with the king on behalf of the Italian of whom you wrote:  he promised to use all his endeavors, and you need not doubt him.  if our gracious and most merciful God would once deliver us from this harsh and cruel tyranny of the enemies of Christ, by which we are so dangerously [surrounded] on all sides, all the godly and learned men will be as well provided for as our poor circumstances will admit of.
    You asked me to settle with master a Lasco about those eighteen crowns, which you lent to some Italian; I have done as you requested, but know not whether you have yet been repaid.  I know that you will not, with your own consent, be a burden to any one, (although what you may call a burden, your friends would consider an honor;) but your most splendid gifts, received from God, have so greatly benefited the commonwealth, and the church of Christ more especially, that we owe our all to you, and you may make what trial you please.
    After I had begun this letter, my wife and five others of my chaplains and domestics were attacked by a new kind of sweating sickness, and were in great danger for twenty-four hours; I myself have but very recently recovered from the same disease.  Pray the Lord that he may have compassion on us, and that we may always be waiting in the fear of God for the day of death.  The infection of this disease is in England most severe, and, what is a most remarkable token of divine vengeance, persons are suddenly taken off by it.  You shall know more fully respecting my affairs next Michaelmas, when I shall have some little intermission of my engagements.  My wife and the other invalids have, through the favor of God, escaped the danger of the disease.
    I commend your whole church and commonwealth to God, and especially the most reverend father, master Pellican.  For master Rodolph Gualter, your two son-in-law, master Gesner, with their respective wives; for all others who embrace with you the religion of Christ; for our sister your wife, and all your family, and master Bibliander, and his wife and family, we sincerely and heartily wish salvation in Christ.  May the Lord also preserve master mayor.  When you write to master Cœlius Secundus, salute him, I entreat you, in my name as much as you can, and you can s much as you please.  Persuade our friend master John Butler to return to England; he may be useful in many respects both to the church and commonwealth.  You know that we are born for our country, and not for ourselves:  were it not so, I should not now be discharging the office of a bishop.  At least ask him to visit us once in England, and he shall learn from me in what way and by what means he may best provide for himself and his family.  May the Lord Jesus long preserve you to the glory of his name!
    Gloucester, Aug. 1, 1551
      As heretofore and for so long a time,
        your most loving brother and gossip,
              JOHN HOOPER,
          Bishop of the church of Gloucester.
    P.S.  I have lent to the student who is the bearer of this letter to you, and to his companion, both natives of Zurich, forty-five English crowns.  You will oblige me much by sending me books printed at Zurich, those especially which contain your works, to an equal amount.  If the young men of Zurich who come over here for the sake of study, should stand in need of my assistance, I will aid them as far as my slender means will allow.  I return you my warmest thanks for your books and letter to me.  When I shall have emerged from the waves of danger, most reverend and learned friend, I will send a messenger of my own, from whom you shall learn all my affairs.  Do not, I pray you, be surprised, that I make no mention of your letters, which I very frequently kiss; for I can never forget either yourself or your kindness towards me.  You shall hear in a future letter, on what subject and on what occasion so fierce and quarrelsome a dispute arose between the bishops and myself.  I agree that the contest should be set at rest by the arbitration of godly men.  I will explain in a few words the cause and ground of the dispute.  The use of vestments peculiar to popery in the ministry of the church has been the occasion here of great disturbance.  Master a Lasco alone, of all the foreigners who have any influence, stood on my side.  Farewell.  I pray God that you may live long and happily, and may all the people of Zurich fare well in Christ.  Amen.  I have written what I can; you know what I mean.  Altogether yours, and deservedly so, if I am my own.

  LETTER XLI. BISHOP HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  Gloucester
  Oct. 27, 1551
    Greeting.  If, my much honored gossip, you had received the letters which I wrote to you towards the end of August and in the month of September, yours Zurich on the 29th of August, which I received at Gloucester on the 22nd of October, would not have been so full of complaint.  I hope that you are by this time fully aware of the feelings and spirit which I entertain towards you.  I will make no answer by way of apology, although I have many weighty and allowable excuses which would avail with you, yourself being the judge.  But you shall learn at another time, what it is still necessary for me to keep silent.  You and all that belongs to you are not displeasing either to God or our king, but quite the contrary, and on that account you are acceptable to both.  You say that they are displeasing to me, but I know you only say so:  far be it that your writings should be lightly esteemed by me.  Of all the learned men under heaven, I have none more dear to me than yourself, and deservedly so.  In many ways I have received benefit, as I still do, from you and from your writings.  Should it please God that I can in any respect be of service to you, you will find me most ready, and mindful, and grateful, both to you and yours.  I return you my warmest thanks for your kindness in sending to me, together with your letter, your godly and learned meditations, which you are preparing by way of popular discourses:  since, however, I left Zurich, I have received no manuscript besides your very useful and excellent Decades, except your commentary on Isaiah as far as the 40th chapter, and on the epistle to the Romans.  I much wish for your other writings, and will amply recompense the copyist.  I have not yet seen the remainder of your commentary on Isaiah; and I mourn over the faithlessness of the men to whom I from time to time entrust grave and honorable duties.  but I would have you to be especially assured, that should I from henceforth fail to write to you every month, either sickness or death will be the occasion of my silence.  You are altogether unconscious how deeply your complaints affect my mind.  You have, I am sure, no one who loves you more in Christ than myself.  Moreover, when I go to London, I will undertake, as I may be able, that a letter shall be sent you from the king, by which he may testify his good-will towards you; and I will endeavor too to relieve, if I can, by means of his royal majesty, the distress of that godly Italian, who is now suffering under the painful necessity of exile: I without doubt am entirely his debtor to serve him.  You need not be anxious about the expense of sending letters from Strasburgh; I will willingly bear it.  I wish that all the letters would reach me which you have sent already or shall send in future.  I am greatly grieved at my letters having been lost on the road.  But they always regarded, as they ought, both God and man, and therefore make me somewhat less anxious.
    The report concerning the death of Peter martyr, I thank God, was false and groundless; he is alive and well, and boldly stands forth as a brave and godly soldier in the army of the Lord.  If he has any thing which he intends to print, I am sure that he will send it you.  He has not yet determined to publish his annotations on Genesis; he is meditating something upon the epistle to the Romans.  I will take care, to the utmost of my power, that none of his writings shall be lost.  Meanwhile, do you always act, as you now do, for the glory of God.  Your writings are exceedingly delightful to me, and to all who have the true worship of God at heart.  I doubt not but that, while you are actively laboring in these endeavors, you incur the hatred and envy of the accomplices of the devil and of antichrist; but happy are those dangers, which are so much connected with the glory of God.  You will receive an account of my labors, which are but small and slight in the vineyard of Christ, through John Rodolph, a worthy and godly youth, whom I entreat you to receive on his return with paternal kindness, and honor him, thus recommended to you by me, with your favor:  he has conducted himself here modestly, piously, and studiously, as you will afterwards learn, if you please, from the letters of all the learned and godly students at Oxford; and, to tell the truth, I do not easily bear his going away.  Let him return to us, if it please the Zurich authorities and yourself, for a year or two, and I will take a portion of his expenses upon myself.  When the two young men from Zurich left this country, I gave them forty-five English crowns; if they will repay me in books printed at Zurich, I shall be quite satisfied.  Among other books I wish for the Bible in one large volume.
    You will learn from the messenger who is traveling between us and Zurich, by what important and perpetual engagements I am overwhelmed.  Excuse, I pray you, my unpolished and too hasty pen.  Salute the lady your wife, with all your family, masters Bibliander, Gualter, Pellican, with their wives; my countryman master Butler with his wife, and pray tell him from me, that he is not born for himself and his friends alone, but that his country also has a claim upon him.  I wish he would at least come over to us once, and perhaps he would not repent the journey.  May the Lord Jesus be always present with the Mayor, your whole senate and commonwealth, and protect his church!  In haste, as you see, at Gloucester, Oct. 27, 1551
          Your ever most attached, as I ought to be,
              JOHN HOOPER, bishop of Gloucester.
    P.S.  I request you will salute in my name those most excellent and learned men, masters Gesner and Otto, whom I dearly love in Christ.  And should master Gesner wish at any time to come over to us, I will provide him with suitable companions who will show him the rivers, and fishes, and animals of this country.  I defer, for the present, any further communication.  Again farewell, and pray that I may long fare well in Christ.

  LETTER XLII. BISHOP HOOPER TO JOHN STUMPHIUS.
  Gloucester
  Oct. 27, 1551
    Greeting.  Your son will, I hope, return from his travels as safe and prosperous as you sent him forth.  Receive him on his return, I pray you, as a father should do.  I have been endeavoring to prevent his going away, by reason of the lateness of the season; but he has altogether made up his mind to undertake the journey in company with some other Germans, who flock over to us for the sake of study.  He has conducted himself soberly, piously, and studiously; and should he happen to return, he will find me his friend.  Make him evermore to fear God, to whom I commend you; and salute your wife in my name.  Gloucester, Oct. 27, 1551
            Of yourself, and all the people of Zurich,
              I am the most loving friend,
                JOHN HOOPER, bishop of Gloucester.

  LETTER XLIII. BISHOP HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  London
  Feb. 28, 1553
    Greeting.  The Englishman, Richard Hilles, promised me a month since that he would faithfully forward you my letter.  If you have received it, it is well: if not, I hope that you will receive it.  I request you not to impute the intermission of my letters either to ingratitude or forgetfulness, but to the weighty and important engagements by which I am continually distracted, and to other reasons which I suppress, until the time shall arrive, when I may be able to correspond with you more freely.  I know that you are expecting an answer to the petitions which you have chiefly preferred by letter: wait a little; you will obtain you wish soon enough, if it is only well enough.  If you have any of the Decads, which many godly persons are expecting from you every fair, already prepared, I would have you dedicate them to the duke of Northumberland.  He is exceedingly partial to you, and is a diligent promoter of the glory of God.  I left master Martyr on the 20th of this February, at oxford, sick of a fever.  May the Lord be with him, and restore him to health!  His wife departed to the Lord on the 16th of this month.  My wife and all my family salute your excellence.  Salute your wife in my name and theirs; we wish your sons and daughters every happiness.  Salute the Mayor, masters Bibliander, Gualter, and Pellican, with their wives, and master Butler and his wife.  London. Feb. 28, 1553
          Your ever most devoted,
            JOHN HOOPER, bishop of Worcester and Gloucester.

  LETTER XLIV. BISHOP HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  unknown
  Sept. 3, 1553
  background: written in prison
    Greeting.  You have been accustomed, my very dear gossip, heavily to complain of me, and very properly, for having so seldom written to you.  But I have now written you many letters during the past year, without having received a single one in reply.  I know that you are not unacquainted with the state of our kingdom.  Our king has been removed from us by reason of our sins, to the very great peril of our church.  His sister Mary has succeeded, whom I pray God always to aid by his Holy Spirit, that she may reign and govern in all respects to the glory of his name.  The altars are again set up throughout the kingdom; private masses are frequently celebrated in many quarters; the true worship of God, true invocation, the right use of the sacraments, are all done away with; divine things are trodden under foot, and human things have the pre-eminence.  May God be present with his church, for the sake of his only Son Jesus Christ!  All godly preachers are placed in the greatest danger: those who have not yet known by experience the filthiness of a prison, are hourly looking for it.  Meanwhile they are all of them forbidden to preach by public authority.  The enemies of the gospel are appointed in their places, and proclaim to the people from the pulpit human doctrines instead of divine truths.  We now place our confidence in God alone, and earnestly entreat him to comfort and strengthen us to endure any sufferings whatever for the glory of his name.  In haste, from prison, at London.  Sept. 3, 1553  Salute your very dear wife, masters Bibliander, Pellican, and Gualter, with their wives, and all the other godly brethren; likewise my countryman master Butler with his wife.
          Yours wholly,
            JOHN HOOPER, bishop of Worcester and Gloucester.

  LETTER XLV. BISHOP HOOPER TO JOHN A LASCO.
  unknown
  Nov. 25, 1553
  background: written in prison
    There is no need for me to commend this noble person to your excellency in many words; for I think that he is known both to yourself and all the other godly persons who have lately left England.  I only request that he may not be deprived of your good offices, should he have any occasion for them.  You will learn from him every thing concerning myself, and also the present condition of the church.  It is indeed a wretched andmiserable one.  May the Lord mercifully look upon us with complacency, and weaken the power of our adversaries!  They are becoming more furious and insolent every day.  But he, who now seems to us to sleep, will at length make his appearance, and cast down his enemies.  Should the Father of mercy grant this favor to us in this life, his holy name be praised; if otherwise, his will be done.  He himself commands us to die for the glory of his name.  May he grant what he commands, and then command things yet more painful, if it seems him good!  I am now writing in haste and by stealth from prison, being now kept in more close and severe confinement than when your excellency left us.  But, by God’s help, I am prepared, both to endure these things, and the yet more painful trials that are about to come.  Salute my old and godly friend, master Martin, the noble personage Utenhovius, and all the rest of our brethren; and I entreat you to commend both myself and my fellow-prisoners in Christ Jesus to our Almighty Father which is in heaven, that by means of our death his glory may sine forth more and more upon this most polluted world.  From prison, Nov. 25, 1553
        Your excellency’s much remembered before God,
            JOHN HOOPER, bishop of Gloucester.

  LETTER XLVI. BISHOP HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER
  unknown
  May 23, 1554
  background: written in prison
    Health.  It is now, my most honored gossip, the ninth month since I have endured the filthiness of a prison.  Meanwhile, however, I have sent you many letters by the hands of godly persons, to the end that by their means I might excite your reverence, with all the other learned ministers of your church, so show yourselves kindly affectioned and merciful to those wretched and unfortunate individuals who have fled from hence for the sake of the Christian religion.  I wrote very briefly, as I was able, because I was not allowed, neither am I at present, to write as I wish; and I write by stealth, which, as you know, is the miserable condition of those in prison.  Yet, as far as I know, you have not sent me even the shortest answer in return.  I am much distressed at this; for, if I am not mistaken, you are aware how greatly I esteem you.  I have always looked upon you as a most revered father and master.  Of all those who are attached to you, you have never found any one dearer than myself; nor have I, to say the truth, ever met with a more sincere friend.  Those who have brought you letters from me, since the death of our most godly king until the present time, were very dear friends and brethren; but the bearer of this is master James Haddon, not only a friend and very dear brother in Christ, but one whom I have always esteemed on every account, by reason of his singular erudition and virtue.  And I do not think that I have ever been acquainted with any one in England, who is endued either with more sincere piety towards God, or more removed from all desire of those perishing objects which foolish mortals admire.  I commend him most earnestly to your good offices.  Salute your very dear wife in my name, your children, and all your family, masters Gualter and Pellican, and all the ministers of your church, master Lavater the mayor, and your whole city.  I would write more openly, if I dared; but I have often been deceived by my friends.  From prison, May 23, 1554
    In a short time, unless the Lord should restrain the tyranny of our enemies, I shall go in the blood of Christ to heaven.
        As heretofore and at all times, your most attached,
                JOHN HOOPER.

  LETTER XLVII. BISHOP HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  unknown
  May 29, 1554
  background: written in prison
    Much health.  I hope, my very dear gossip, that you have received my former letters, which I have hitherto written from prison, to be delivered to you by those godly men who have gone over from hence to you.  As in those letters I entreated your accustomed kindness towards my fellow-countrymen, so by this I entreat the same on behalf of the bearer, my friend Guido, my most faithful associate in the labors of the gospel.  I have had no one with me who is so devoted to the flock of Christ, or who has undergone continual labors with greater equanimity:  I commend him, from whom you will learn all the circumstances of my present condition, to your kindness, and to all the godly members of your church, as the companion of all my labors in the vineyard of Christ.  I would write in his favor to the other godly men, who are now, like yourselves, soldiers of Christ, but the keeper of the prison will not allow me to do so.  it is with difficulty that I have been able to write thus briefly from prison, whence you may understand that my life is in very great danger.  Aid me in your prayers to God.  I am not unmindful of you.  I salute the lady your wife, all your family, and all the rest whom you know.  From prison, May 29th, 1554
        Yours, as I ought to be, most lovingly,
                JOHN HOOPER>

  LETTER XLVIII. BISHOP HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  unknown
  Dec. 11, 1554
  background: written in prison
    Grace and peace from the Lord!  Your letter, my beloved brother, Zurich on the tenth of October, I received on the eleventh of December.  It was very delightful to me, because it was full of comfort.  I readily perceived therein your ancient feelings of love and affection towards me, and am most thankful to you that in these most dangerous times you have not forgotten me.  I have always entertained an especial love for you on account of your preeminent good qualities, and the excellent gifts of God in you.  And if, as you write, you have not received any letters from me for a whole year, this has not been occasioned by my not having written, but by my having confided my letters to careless and dishonest persons.  Nor have I received all that you have sent to me, but they have been either lost by the carelessness of the postman, or intercepted by the malice of the evil-disposed.  The same thing has happened both to the letters and the book of master Theodore: for I never heard of [his book respecting] our Lord’s sermon on the mount, which he sent me, till some days after the death of our most holy king Edward; and then [I saw it] on the borders of Wales, in the library of a certain godly man whom I had appointed dean over some churches there.  But what you have now written, I will take care shall be sent to all my brethren and fellow-prisoners for their perusal.
    I congratulate you all upon the safety and steadfastness of your church, and I pray to God for his Son Jesus Christ’s sake evermore to fortify and defend it against the tyranny of antichrist.  In this country the wound which he received is entirely healed, and he is once more regarded as the head of the church, who is not even a member of the church of Christ.  You will learn from others both my own situation and the state of public affairs.  We are still involved in the greatest dangers, as we have been for almost the last eighteen months.  The enemies of the gospel are every day giving us more and more annoyance; we are imprisoned apart from each other, and treated with every degree of ignominy.  They are daily threatening us with death, which we are quite indifferent about; in Christ Jesus we boldly despise the sword and the flames.  We know in whom we have believed, and we are sure that we shall lay down our lives in a good cause.  Meanwhile aid us with your prayers, that he who has begun a good work in us will perform it even unto the end.  We are the Lord’s; let him do what seems good in his eyes.
    I entreat you to comfort occasionally by your letters that most exemplary and godly woman, my wife, and exhort her to bring up our children carefully, Rachel your little god-daughter, an exceedingly well-disposed girl, and my son Daniel, and piously to educate them in the knowledge and fear of God.  I moreover send your reverence two little books for your perusal, consideration, and correction, if they contain any thing not agreeable to the word of God.  I have entitled the one, An Hyperaspismus touching the true doctrine and use of the Lord’s Supper; and I have dedicated it to the parliament of England, that we may publicly reply to our adversaries in the court of parliament.  The title of the other is, A Tractate upon discerning and avoiding false religion.  And I beg that you will cause them to be printed as soon as possible.  Both the books are approved by all the godly and learned in this country.  I have moreover written many other letters to the bishops, that they should bring forward the books in parliament; and I wish these also to be printed, that all may perceive how unfairly and unjustly we are dealt with.  But I need not write to you at length upon this subject; you will understand my wishes from the books and letters themselves.  And if your friend Froschover should be prevented from printing them by more important engagements, I wish he would send them to Basle to master Oporinus, who prints very correctly, and sends out all his publications in a superior manner.  I know he will do this, if only the books are sent to him with a recommendation from you, and which I earnestly entreat you to supply.  There is no occasion for you to fear for me, as though the enemies of the gospel would rage more fiercely and with greater cruelty on account of these books.  I have a most faithful guardian and defender of my salvation in our heavenly Father through Jesus Christ, to whom I have wholly committed myself.  To his faithfulness and protection I commend myself:  if he shall prolong my days, may be cause it to be for the glory of his name; but if he wills that my short and evil life should be ended, I can say with equal complacency, His will be done!  I am writing by stealth, and therefore my letter to your excellence is shorter and more confused [than I could wish]; take it, I pray you, in good part.  In haste, from prison, Dec. 11, 1554
    Salute for me dutifully your excellent wife and all your family at home and elsewhere; and all others, as you know.
          Your excellence’s most affectionate,
              as I ought to be,
                JOHN HOOPER.

  LETTER XLIANNE HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  London
  April 3, 1551
    I have received your letter, most Christian sir, in which, as in a glass, I perceive how greatly you are interested for us.  But though I acknowledge myself quite incapable of returning you the thanks I ought for your especial friendship towards us, I will not cease from offering them; and I heartily pray God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he may abundantly recompense you, as I am unable to do so myself.  I will not acquaint you with the reason of master Hooper’s imprisonment, until I have communicated to him your letter, which at present is quite out of my power; for he went down to his see as soon as he was discharged.  I doubt not but that he will satisfy your desire as soon as he is informed of it; and this seems to me far more convenient, than for me to make the attempt without consulting him.  But as you inquire how my daughter Rachel is going on, I consider it my duty to give you some information concerning her.  First then, you must know that she is well acquainted with English, and that she has learned by heart within these three months the form of giving thanks, the ten commandments, the Lord’s prayer, the apostles’ creed, together with the first and second psalms of David.  And now, as she knows almost all her letters, she is instructed in the catechism.  If I could write in German, I should more frequently take pen in hand.  But if your son should happen to come to England, I shall have a better opportunity both of writing, and also in some measure of repaying your paternal affection for us, and which I value more than the richest treasures of gold or silver.  I have no news to communicate respecting Ireland, except that the French king is reported to have prepared a fleet for the purpose of invading and taking possession of it, but his design was discovered by the activity of some faithful Frenchman.
    I send you a small gold coin, in which the effigy of the king of England is very well expressed, as a return for the token you sent to Rachel, for which she thanks you in her childish prattle, and sends her best love.  I entreat you to recommend master Hooper to be more moderate in his labor: for he preaches four, or at least three times every day; and I am afraid lest these overabundant exertions should occasion a premature decay, by which very many souls now hungering after the word of God, and whose hunger is well known from the frequent anxiety to hear him, will e deprived both of their teacher and his doctrine.  We are much disturbed by the apprehension of riots; for there is great danger of them very shortly by reason of the dearness of provisions and other things, although there is great plenty of wheat and other grain: but on whom the blame is to be laid you know better than I do.  I have forwarded your letter to master Hooper, and will take care to send you his reply.  Farewell.  Salute master Bibliander and his wife, masters Gualter and Pellican and their wives, master Zuinglius and his wife, to whom also I send a golden coin stamped with the king’s effigy.  London, April 3, [1551].
              Your most dutiful,
                ANNE DE TSERCLAS, now HOOPER.
    My maid Joanna salutes you, as does her husband, the servant of the French church.  When you write to master Hooper or myself, take care that your letters are carefully sealed; for there are certain busy-bodies who are in the habit of opening and reading them, if by any means they can do it.

  LETTER L. ANNE HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  Gloucester
  Oct. 27, 1551
    Greeting. When the bearer of this was with us, there were two reasons which prevented my answering your letter; the one, because I am unable to express my sentiments in German; the other, because I was overwhelmed by so many and urgent engagements that scarce any leisure was allowed me.  Yet the regard I bear you drew me aside a little while from my employments, and compelled me altogether to put them off to another time.  At length then I have prepared myself with much satisfaction for a diligent though hasty correspondence, that by this effort I might, in some measure at least, gratify your mind with my most insignificant letter.  For I love, and esteem, and reverence you most especially, and I return you my best thanks for having condescended to write me a most elegant and kind letter, though I have hitherto been very negligent and remiss in writing.  But the receipt of your letter divested me of all sloth, though indeed at this time my engagements will not admit of its indulgence:  everything however that I intended to write to you I have turned over to this Mercury; and I pray you to give him credit for what he may tell you, as time forbids my entering more into the subject.  I justly lament your absence, who have stood forth as my most excellent friend, nay, rather I may say, my patron; and who have so obliged me by your favors, that were I even to pledge my life, much less my property, I should be unable to return your kindness.  Wherefore since my life and property are not sufficient to repay my obligations, I must still remain in debt.  Oh! I wish that the distance of place did not separate us at so long an interval, that we might enjoy the same intimacy as heretofore.  But I hope that you will shortly visit England, which if you will accomplish, I shall then consider myself most fortunate in being again permitted to enjoy your long wished for society.  I pray you, my father, to salute your wife, my mother, affectionately in my name, as also all my other friends.  Gloucester, Oct. 27, 1551  Farewell.
    Rachel, thank God, is in excellent health, and salutes you and you wife, and begs your blessing, and prays that in your blessing God may deign to bless her also.
            Ever your entire and obliged friend,
                ANNE HOOPER.

  LETTER LI. ANNE HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  Frankfort
  April 20, 1554
    Much health.  I recognized, my venerable friend, in the letter you lately wrote me, your wonted kindness: you show yourself so anxious about me, that I could not expect more even if you were my father.  And indeed that letter was doubly acceptable, both because I perceived that I was not neglected by you, and also, because God had at that time visited me with a calamity in which I was forced not only to lament the common condition of the church at large, but also my own individual affliction.  My woman’s mind being battered with these two engines, what wonder if it seemed immediately about to give way?  But the Spirit of the Lord was with me, and raised up his ministers to give me comfort; among whom you were one, by whose  was especially refreshed.  May the Lord Jesus repay you with his blessing!  For after I had received and read it over, I began by God’s assistance to bear myself up against such a weight of calamity; and I am hitherto supporting myself, as far as I am able, by the word of God, often reading over again your letter, to add spurs to this dull flesh.  You will perform an act therefore worthy of your kindness, if you will continue in this manner, by more frequent letters, to uphold one whom you have in some degree already raised up.
    I thank you for expressing your wish that I were with you yonder, nor is there any other place I should prefer.  But since the Lord, by my husband’s bidding and the advice of my friends, has at length driven me from England, and conducted me safe to Antwerp, I availed myself of an opportunity of accompanying a party every way suitable, and joined my female relative at Frankfort, where now, by the mercy of God, the senate has granted liberty to the foreign church for their whole ecclesiastical ministry both of the word and sacraments.  On this account I shall prefer remaining here in my own hired house, until I see how the Lord shall deal with my husband, concerning whom, as I have not yet received any intelligence, I am not a little anxious.  But yet I know that he is under God’s care; and I therefore acquiesce in the providence of my God: and although this burden of widowhood is very painful, yet I comfort myself as far as I am able by prayer and the word of God.  I entreat you for Christ’s sake, to aid me both with your prayers and correspondence.  Salute, I pray you, most dutifully, my very dear gossip your wife, with all your family.  I salute masters Bibliander, Pellican, Gualter, Sebastian the schoolmaster, and all the brethren.  I pray Almighty God continually to afford you an increase of his Spirit.  Farewell, my much esteemed and revered friend in Christ.  Frankfort, April 20, the day after the opening of the church of the white virgins to us, when master Valerandus Pollanus, the husband of my relative, and the chief pastor of the church, preached a sermon, and baptized his young son in the Rhine.  May God grant to this church a due increase, and worthy of his name!  Do you pray for it.  The pastor himself, my kinsman, earnestly entreated me to salute you in his name, and to commend his ministry to your prayers and those of your colleagues.  Again farewell in Christ.  1554
    Your god-daughter Rachel salutes you and your wife.  Daniel is still in England, and I shall send a certain most respectable matron, who has hitherto been living with me, to bring him hither.  I commend my honored husband to your prayers.
            Your very loving friend,
                ANNE HOOPER.

  LETTER LII. ANNE HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  Frankfort
  Sept. 22, 1554
    Greeting.  Your letter, my loving friend, was very gratifying to me, and I thank you for continuing to be so anxious about me.  I thank you too very much for your anxiety about master Hooper.  By the grace of God he bears every thing, even his threatened death, with contancy and fortitude.  Your  know will be very acceptable to him, as he has already told me more than once.  I entreat you for Christ’s sake, deny him not this comfort.  If I receive your letter, I will easily take care that it shall be delivered.  For hitherto, by the goodness of God, he has always been allowed to write to me, and to receive my letters: only take care that your letters are delivered at Strasburgh, either to master Burcher, or to master John Garner, the minister of the French church.  I have been hitherto tolerably well, and bear this calamity as firmly as I can.  The Lord will aid and succor my weakness.  I have need of the prayers and sweet consolations of my good friends: wherefore I earnestly entreat you not to neglect me.  As to news, there is not any that I know of but what you may learn from the merchants who return to you from this place.  Salute, I entreat you, in my name my excellent gossip, your most honorable wife, masters Gualter, Bibliander, Pellican, and their wives.  Master Cechelles salutes you, as does Valerandus Pollanus, who also sends you this little book, from which you may know the constitution and general order of our little church: in which should there be any thing which you think requires correction, you will exceedingly oblige him by letting him know; and I entreat you to do so, for Christ’s sake.  I commend myself and my children to your piety and most devout prayers.  Farewell.  Frankfort, Sept. 22, 1554
            Your very loving gossip,
                ANNE HOOPER.

LETTER LII. ANNE HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Frankfort
Nov. 12, 1554
  I return you everlasting thanks, very dear and honored friend, for your delightful letter, which has afforded me much comfort.  I acknowledge, and experience in myself, and perceive also in many others, what the Lord Christ foretold; and I often soothe my mind, when wounded by anxiety, with the sweet reflection, that our god is faithful.  I earnestly entreat you therefore, not to cease pleading for me with the Lord in your prayers, and by a letter from time to time to arouse my spirit, which, to say the truth, I very often feel to be all but dead through grief.  And I now require the aid of all godly persons, although I am never entirely forsaken of the Lord, who sometimes refreshes me with the anticipation of a better life.  But you yourself know how suitable to a diseased mind is the conversation of a sincere friend.  I trust in the Lord, that the letter which you are writing to my dear husband, will afford him no less consolation than the one to myself; and in his name I thank you for that service.  He is indeed worthy of the kind attention of all godly persons.  I wish indeed I may some time have it in my power worthily to repay your kindness; my very readiness to do so would show that I am not wanting in gratitude.  But you know me well.
  There is no news much worth your notice.  For there has not been of a long time any certain intelligence from England; except that those persons who arrived from thence on the 10th instant, assert that a meeting of parliament had taken place respecting the coronation of the Spaniard; and that the hand of an individual had been burnt off, because he refused to hear mass, and chose rather to be brought to the stake; also that some godly persons had lately been thrown into prison for the sake of religion.  If this be the case, I am more than commonly anxious about my husband.  May the Lord Jesus preserve us both!  The lesser assembly of the states of Germany commenced here on the fourteenth of October; but this has no concern with religion, about which they have not yet said a single word.  They are laboring for the tranquility of Germany, that it may be safe from the attacks of the marquis of Brandenburgh.  I cannot say what is proposed respecting the French (king), for I have not heard.  I wish the people of Germany would not so rashly trust in foreign princes who are of a different religion to themselves: but you will hear more from the very respectable man who will deliver this letter.
  I salute my very dear gossip your wife, and all friends.  My Daniel and Rachel also salute you.  Masters Valerandus Pollanus and Secelles, whom you desired me to salute, salute you in return.  The peace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you!  I commend myself to your prayers.  Frankfort, Nov. 12, 1554
        Your very loving gossip and sister in Christ,
                ANNE HOOPER.

LETTER LIV. ANNE HOOPER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Frankfort
April 11, 1555
  Much health.  When I received, most loving gossip, the book of my dear husband, I desired, as he bade me by his letter, that it should be published before this fair.  For which reason I sent it to master Peter Martyr, that he might get it done at Strasburgh.  He excused himself on account of the doctrine of the eucharist, which is not received there.  It might be printed here by permission of the senate; but it is better that you should first of all revise the book, and procure it to be printed yonder.  But as I am well aware that his memory is most precious to you, I do not doubt but that you will be equally ready to oblige him in this matter, as if he were now alive: indeed, he is alive with all the holy martyrs, and with his Christ the head of the martyrs; and I am dead here till God shall again unite me to him.   I thank you for your most godly letter.  I certainly stand much in need of such consolations, and of your prayers.  I pray you therefore by the holy friendship of the most holy martyr my husband, of whom being now deprived I consider this life to be death, do not forsake me.  I am not one who is able to return your kindness; but you will do an acceptable service to God, who especially commends widows to your protection.  I and my Rachel return our thanks for the elegant new year’s gift you sent us.  Salute your excellent wife, my very dear gossip, and all friends.  Farewell.  Frankfort, April 11, 1555
        Your very loving gossip and sister in Christ,
                ANNE HOOPER.
  Your [god-daughter] Rachel sends you an English coin, on which are the effigies of Ahab and Jezebel.

LETTER LV. JOHN PONET TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
April 14, 1556
  Many thanks, most excellent master Bullinger, are due from us exiles to our Lord God, for having placed over his church in this calamitous age such a teacher as yourself.  For we perceive you to be one who is willing to afford every consolation, and who is able to afford very much, to the afflicted servants of Christ yonder.  But how greatly your kind offices towards them have bound the rest of the English to you, I had rather imagine than express, lest, in attempting to declare your acts of kindness towards them, extensive as they have been, I should seem either to obscure their greatness by recounting them, or, by treating of them too lightly, to diminish their importance.  But in speaking of myself, namely, an exile, and weighed down with various crosses from the Lord, I can neither refrain from speaking of the great consolation you have afforded me, nor can I adequately express my thanks.  Master Burcher, and others, have often told me of your friendly greetings.  My friend Cheke also has repeated to me your salutations in your letters to him, and so likewise has Sampson in his; in which I have perused from your pen many things most gratifying to me.  For I have perceived therein your distress and vehement sorrow of mind for the universal flock of Christ.  I have perceived also, at the same time, a signal manifestation of your benevolence and regard towards me.  The Lord God, I acknowledge, has taken from me all that I had, which indeed was most ample.  But why should he not?  He who gave has taken away.  But what? worldly, earthly, perishable things; while he is intending, I hope, yea, I do not doubt, to bestow upon me things heavenly and imperishable.  What is exile?  A thing which, provided you have wherewithal to subsist, is painful only in imagination.  I know that it is the scourge of the Lord; but with what mildness and fatherly affection he deals with me, I can readily learn even from this, that he has afforded me for my comforters Bullinger, Melancthon, Martyr, and other most shining lights of his church.  Happy was the widow of Sarepta in experiencing the mercy of God, and the consolation imparted by Elijah; wretched and most unworthy were those lepers who rejected Christ their only comfort.  But since it has seemed good to my God to raise up in you such an Elijah as can support me in my affliction; I write these things to you, not so much to express my thanks for your so great and truly Christian care bestowed upon me, (although those are especially due to you from me,) as to acquaint you at the same time that I have both derived the greatest pleasure from those letters of yours to your friends respecting me, and that I acknowledge myself exceedingly indebted to you for them.
  My friend Cheke bade me, on his departure for Antwerp, to salute you in his name: he told me also, that he had heard that Ignatius, in Greek, had been sent over to some printer at Zurich to be printed; if this be the case, will you allow me to trouble you so far as to procure me a transcript of that passage from the epistle to the Philadelphians respecting the marriage of Paul and the other apostles?  I have now a controversy about this matter with a most impudent papist.  I am ashamed to say more about this request; but you must know that I am of necessity compelled to make it, for I have no other means of obtaining what I wish.  But as often as I consider the character that Bullinger bears in the general opinion, my mind tells me before-hand that this little trouble will not be displeasing to you.  Excuse, I pray you, this liberty.  Excuse also my hasty pen.  Farewell, and count me, I pray you, in the number of your friends.  Strasburgh, April 14, 1556
        Yours wholly,
          JOHN PONET, Anglus,
            formerly bishop of Winchester.

LETTER LVI. JOHN PONET TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
June, 1556
  Do not, I pray you, most excellent master Bullinger, take it ill that I have not sooner replied to your last letter.  The long delay of master Martyr, who wished to be the bearer of my letter, has been the cause.  His departure from hence to you is a proof of the exceeding favor of God to your church.  I wish my affairs had been so circumstanced as to allow of my accompanying him; as much indeed for the sake of hearing him as yourself.  I return you my best thanks for having procured the transcript of that passage of Ignatius by master Gessner.  The name of that individual is of so much authority with me, that the very paper, which from your testimony I know to have been written upon by his hand, I lay up among my choicest treasures: for I am willingly superstitious in preserving the memorials of such men.  Nothing affords me greater pleasure than to hear from your letter, that you will take care that our friendship confirmed in Christ shall be a durable one; for I seem thereby to be altogether united to you.  I wish that what you wrote to me concerning sir John Cheke may not prove prophetic.  I doubt not but that he will seal his testimony to the gospel with his blood.  What will not Pharaoh attempt against Israel, especially on his return from exile?  I acknowledge myself very much indebted both to yourself and your church, on the behalf of the Englishman, master Parkhurst.  My services, although my power is altogether nothing, yet such as they are, are entirely at your command, if I can be of use to you in any thing.  Salute, I pray you, in my name master Gessner, to whom I certainly would have written, had not my modesty overcome my courage.  But if I am wrong in this respect, I pray you forgive me.  But I hope that he will shortly take care that Ignatius be printed in Greek.  May our great and good God long preserve you both in safety to his church!
        Yours wholly,
          JOHN PONET, Winton.

LETTER LVII. MARIA PONET TO PETER MARTYR.
Strasburgh
July 15, 1557
  It is not from any fault of mine, most accomplished sir, that you have been so long without your books.  My dear husband has died and left me a wretched widow, and entirely unacquainted with these things: he left also I know not how many or what kind of books, all of which, as I thought they belonged to me, I sold to that excellent person, and my very good friend, master Cook; which when I had done, master Jewel informed me by letter, that some of them belonged to your excellency, and that you were making inquiry after them.  As soon as I understood this to be the case, I addressed myself with all diligence, and frequently too, to master Cook, that I might be permitted to re-purchase, at whatever cost, those books of yours, which I had before sold him by mistake for my own.  But from some cause or other I could not obtain my request.  Since therefore I was exceedingly anxious to restore you your books, and could find no other way of doing so, I have purchased new ones at the booksellers, which I have destined for your reverence, and caused to be forwarded to you by my worthy friend John Abel.  For although I am but a poor widow, I had rather die than to an injury to any one, or than not pay every one their due, as far as lies in my power.  It truly grieves me very much, that I have put off this business till the present time: but your kindness will excuse me, for I should have accomplished it sooner, if I could any where have met with the books on sale before.  Farewell, very learned and dear sir:  I request you too of your kindness not to forget me in your prayers, and I will always pray for you.  Strasburgh, July 15, 1557
            Your reverence’s most devoted,
                MARIA PONET.

LETTER LVIII. RICHARD COX TO HENRY BULLINGER.
the Palace, Westminster
Oct. 22, 1549
  There are many things, my very dear friend in Christ, which ought justly to inspire me with veneration for yourself; namely, your singular erudition and piety, so renowned throughout all Christendom.  Many and splendid are the monuments of your talent, which have everywhere most clearly set forth the glory of God.  These things however, important as they are, being of general interest, are not so likely to affect individuals:  but the instance of your kindness with which you have lately favored me, has more intimately and powerfully impressed my mind; I mean, your having done me the honor of presenting me with your most learned letter, and jewel of a book.  For there shine therein the jewels, not of earth, but heaven; not those which attract the sight, but which wonderfully delight the mind.  I thank you therefore most heartily, and I implore the great and good God very long to preserve both yourself and those like you, as the most solid pillars of his church.  Farewell.  From the king’s palace at Westminster, Oct. 22, 1549
            Your most devoted, 
                EICHARD COX.

LETTER LIRICHARD COX TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
Nov. 1, 1550
  I seem very much indebted, very dear brother in Christ, to the divine goodness, for having requited my short and barren letter with such an exuberant and copious treasure of your writings.  This is the manner of the Lord our God, who is wont to bestow all things in rich abundance upon those who diligently seek him.  You have followed his example, and, in imitation of his fruitful fields, which return more than they receive, you have repaid my letter with abundant interest.
  Your letter ought, on these accounts, to be most gratifying to me; first, because it is full of all kindness and affection towards me, and a most certain evidence of it; secondly, because it exhibits a heart glowing with all the ardor of piety and divine love; lastly, because it declares that not only the queen dowager, but likewise others of the more pious nobility of this kingdom, regard their Bullinger with so much love and affection.  Your little work presented to the queen dowager was received by her most kindly, and read with the greatest interest and attention.  Nothing can be more gratifying to her than studious labors executed by godly men.  I return you my best thanks for having again favored me with another present, and that not so much a paper one, as one that breathes heavenly ambrosia on every side.  Moreover you have no reason to fear any exception being taken to your books, as long as the divine mercy shall preserve to us our king; in whom, believe me, there already shines forth an incredible measure of learning, with a zeal for religion, and a judgment all but mature.
  I have carefully saluted in your own words the most reverend the archbishop of Canterbury, the earl of Warwick, and the marquis of Dorset, all of whom desired me to salute you most courteously in return.  We are anxiously expecting those other works which you promised shortly to publish, that you may never cease to deserve well of us, and receive a most abundant recompence, not from us, but from him in whose service you are especially enlisted.  Farewell.
  After I had written the above, my letter being long detained either through my own negligence, or by reason of the infrequency of the post, it was reported to me that certain other of your works had been published; which diligence of yours I congratulate both on your account and our own.  Again farewell, my very dear brother in Christ.  London, Nov. 1, 1550
          Your much attached,
              RICHARD COX.

LETTER LRICHARD COX TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Westminster
May 5, 1551
  Your having deigned, most esteemed brother in Christ, to honor and distinguish me with such abundant favors, has added very considerably to my former obligations to you.  You have requited my laconic and barren letter with almost an entire volume, and that too a most learned one, and most gratifying to me in the perusal.  You proceed, moreover, to make me happy with a double present, namely, the treatise of master Calvin concerning that most Christian concord established between you in the matter of th eucharist, and the fifth Decade of your sermons, which John ab Ulmis brought me yesterday night.  For these presents I return you the best thanks in my power.  I am exceedingly delighted with them both.  Oh that the most merciful God would grant, some time or other, that in treating of the holy supper the universal church of Christ would aim at the same mark of truth!
  In reading your books, especially when any passage shall occur which may peculiarly affect me by its piety, I will not cease to bear you in my remembrance, and to importune God in my prayers, that he may very long preserve you to his church, and more and more endue you with his holy Spirit.  And when in so candid and Christian a manner you remind me of my duty, and so seriously excite and so solemnly engage me to the right performance of my office; I consider this as done by the most holy Spirit of the Lord, that I may not be inactive or negligent in his work.  For I daily feel how supine we are in the Lord’s business, and how diligent and earnest in our own.
  Moreover, I embrace your sound and wholesome counsel respecting the reformation of the church of God, with the greater readiness, inasmuch as you so entirely coincide with me in that belief which a merciful God has given me in these things.  For I am of opinion that all things in the church should be pure, simple, and removed as far as possible from the elements and pomps of this world.  But in this our church what can I do, who am so deficient both in learning and authority?  I can only endeavor to persuade our bishops to be of the same mind and opinion with myself, and in the mean time commit to God the care and conduct of his own work.
  You are most worthy, my Bullinger, of receiving the greatest favors, since you so gratefully accept those which are either of no value, or at least, of very little importance.  those two youths, who resided some time with me, are from their piety, and ardent desire of learning, worthy of the favor and good-will of pious persons.  The other two, who have lately arrived, and whom you so greatly recommended to me, I will treat, were it only for your sake, with the greatest kindness in my power.  I will not fail to salute in your name those two noble personages, and your great admirers.  May the Lord Jesus very long preserve you in safety, and give you both strength and courage for the restoration of his church!  Farewell.  Westminster, May 5, 1551
          Your much attached and
            very loving brother in Christ,
                RICHARD COX.

LETTER LXI. RICHARD COX TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Windsor
Oct. 5, 1552
  Although I have nothing of any consequence at this time to write to you, very dear brother in Christ, yet I am loath to dismiss our friend John [ab Ulmis] altogether without a letter from me; and he himself would be much grieved at my doing so.  As to what concerns the true religion, blessed be the Lord God, a ray of whose glory is wonderfully shining upon us from day to day, we have now for the second time altered the administration of the public prayers and even of the sacraments themselves, and have framed them according to the rule of God’s word; but the severe institutions of Christian discipline we most utterly abominate.  We would be sons, and heirs also, but we tremble at the rod.  Do pray stir us up, and our nobility too, by the Spirit which is given to you, to a regard for discipline; without which, I grieve to say it, the kingdom will be taken away from us, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruit thereof.
  But there is one thing, my Bullinger, respecting which I most anxiously desire to be thoroughly instructed.  I read in the place where you treat of the Lord’s supper, in your fifth Decade, these words:  “Since it is not a public or general assembly when four or five communicate with a sick person, those who affirm that the supper may be administered to the sick at home, if others also receive it at the same time, say nothing to the purpose.”  What if, when the congregation is duly called together, three, four, or five only, out of many hundreds, are willing to receive the sacrament of the eucharist, all the rest refusing to do so, is it not allowable for them to receive it either in the presence of the others, or after they have left the church?  Why then should a sick person be deprived of this benefit?  I much wish for fuller information upon this point, as soon as you shall have leisure to afford it.  May the Lord Jesus very long preserve you to us in safety, to the glory of Christ and the edification of his church!  Windsor in England, Oct. 5, 1552
            Your brother in Christ,
                RICHARD COX.

LETTER LXII. OWEN OGLETHORPE TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Magdalene College, Oxford
Oct. 30, 1548
  Grace and comfort of the Holy Ghost!  Your illustrious reputation and singular learning, most accomplished sir, have for many yeas past excited in my mind a great regard for you; so that it has for a long time been my most earnest desire that a fitting opportunity might sometime be afforded me, if not of personal communication with you, at least of addressing you by letter, that a mutual regard might be established between us.  And this ardent desire of mine was in a measure accomplished, when about ten years since Nicholas Partridge, a person most dear to me upon many accounts, being overtaken with sickness on his way into Italy, was entertained by you at your house, and having recovered his health by means of your liberality, on his return to England together with your friend Rodolph, was the bearer of a letter to me from you; which as I preserve by me no less willingly than carefully as a signal token of your regard to me, so I most earnestly embrace and reverence your courtesy, who, easily excelling as you do all persons in learning, have nevertheless condescended to write to an individual like myself, and, as you have most politely said, to court my friendship.  And availing myself at that time of the favorable opportunity of writing, I sent your excellency by that same attendant of yours my unpolished letter, with the intention of writing more frequently, had a suitable means of communication been afforded me.  But I am now once more addressing your reverence in this letter with the greater freedom, because John ab Ulmis, a young man of good hopes, has lately brought me a salutation from you, with the expression of your desire (as he informed me) in your letter to him, that John Rodolph Stumphius, a youth no less amiable than studious, who has most courteously offered me his services, might not return to you without a letter from me.  I willingly commend him to you; and if you will assist him in his studies, according to your exceeding kindness, there is no doubt but that he will some time or other be of great benefit to the state.  Farewell, most illustrious sir, and may the Lord Jesus long preserve you, and prosper your studies!  Oxford, from Magadlene College, Oct. 30
        Your excellency’s most attached,
            OWEN OGLETHORPE.

LETTER LXIII. ROBERT HORN TO JOHN WOLFIUS.
Frankfort
Feb. 2, 1556
  Since, my dearest Wolfius, nothing is more becoming a Christian man, than to have a mind full of love towards all, and feelings of compassion and kindness towards those who are miserable exiles for the sake of the true religion, (feelings which all the English who heretofore sojourned at Zurich ought to recognize in yourself, and which I myself experienced beyond the rest;) so nothing is more unbecoming him who professes even the least regard to what is right, than to show himself unmindful of, or ungrateful for, a benefit received.  The slightest possible suspicion of such conduct I earnestly desire may be removed from me as far as possible.  And I have therefore thought it better to let you know this by a letter, however brief, than by my silence to afford you any occasion of suspecting evil of me.  Receive then this short letter, as a testimony of a mind ready and prepared to return your kindness, had not fortune denied me the ability corresponding to the readiness of my inclination.  My dear brother Richard [Chambers] salutes you, and acknowledges himself bound to you by an equal obligation with myself.  Salute, I pray you, in our name our very dear friends in Christ, masters Pellican, Gualter, Bibliander, Simler, Zuinglius, Lavater, Haller, Frisius, John ab Ulmis, and both the elder and younger Froschover.  And especially salute most affectionately in my name one who deserves so well of me, Peter Stainer, with his most amiable wife: nor would I desire to pass over our landlady, who, as she wrote word to master Richard, sold, by your assistance, the two beds for fourteen florins, and I know not what other articles besides; which amount we desire to be transmitted by Froschover, or some other confidential person, to Frankfort at the next fair, together with a small portmanteau which we also left to be forwarded by your kindness, and that of John ab Ulmis.  Farewell, most excellent sir.  Frankfort, Feb. 2, 1556
            Yours wholly, in Christ,
                ROBERT HORN.
  P.S.  Out of the money which our landlady has in charge, please to give her one florin for her trouble, and send the balance to us.

LETTER LXIV. ROBERT HORN AND RICHARD CHAMBERS TO THE SENATE OF ZURICH.
Frankfort
Feb. 3, 1556
  Hospitality indeed is always commendable in every one; and in you, most grave and potent lords, it has been truly admirable: for that those whom nature, or rather God, has rendered brave and powerful in war, for the purpose, as it should seem, of fighting the Lord’s battles,--that you, I say, should become so compassionate, as to be the entertainers of the humble, wandering, dispersed and wretched members of the church, cannot indeed be passed over without great admiration; and chiefly for this reason, inasmuch as not having been disturbed in your own persons by any storms of misfortune and calamity, your not having hitherto been under any necessity of requiring assistance, your not having had recourse to any one for support, in a word, your not having been in the way of experiencing the benevolence of others in this respect, proves that this your hospitable feeling cannot arise from the desire to return a kindness, or from your having been subjected to the like calamities yourselves.  Many persons indeed are led by the feelings of commiseration to relieve those who have suffered the like misfortunes with themselves; and all persons, those at least who have any regard to principle, consider themselves so obliged, as it were, by the law of requital, as that, having been in circumstances of trouble and distress themselves, and having therein experienced the liberality of others, they are unwilling, through an instinctive sense of natural justice, to refuse to persons laboring under the like afflictions that assistance, which the more fortunate are always able to afford to those in need without any detriment to themselves.
  I will not, however, any longer praise you, but rather acknowledge in you the efficacy of the word, or the power of God in his word, which was mighty in you also who believed unto salvation.  “The voice of the Lord is powerful, the voice of the Lord is full of majesty,” as the Psalmist says; and it has certainly the power of renewing and transforming us into other men.  That frequent exclamation of master Zuinglius has also reached my ears, where he is wont to affirm, speaking from experience, that evangelical doctrine (though it has done much beside), yet, if it had effected nothing else, has however produced this advantage, that by the preaching of it men are rendered much more civilized in their manners, and altogether much more humane in their feelings.  If that most excellent man, so worthy of everlasting and pious remembrance, were now living, I should address him in the same language that formerly in the gospel the citizens of Samaria addressed to the woman of that city, “Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for we have heard and know ourselves;” yea, we have experienced, we have felt it.  For with what entire liberty, as far as our religion was concerned, did we exercise freedom of conscience among you!  how exempted were we from all tributary exactions, which you might justly have demanded for the public necessities even from your own citizens!  Nay, how favored were we by the liberality of your townsmen as well as your own!  Why should I mention the advice, the consolations of your ministers; the lamentations of the citizens sympathizing with us on our condition; the gratuitous services of the apothecaries and physicians?  So that we were evidently not regarded and considered by you as guests, but as citizens, and, if possible, yet more.  What pains you took to examine into our wants, our deficiencies, that out of your plenty and abundance you might provide for their supply!  Lastly, how did you spontaneously offer us, on our departure, in case we should have occasion to return, the same kindness, the same quiet habitations, the same liberty of permission to reside among you; so that you have, as it were, your gates always open to ourselves and our countrymen!  Truly this your affection towards us was more than paternal.  We never indeed experienced in our own country greater compassion, kindness, and munificence; so that we all of us regarded almost as a proverb the saying, “It is good to be here.”  We should never have suffered ourselves to be torn from you, had we not been invited, and almost compelled as it were, by the two importunate letters of our countrymen, to relieve the extreme necessity of the now almost ruined church of our exiles at Frankfort.  Forgive us therefore that we could no longer be onerous to those to whom we desire to do honor.
  And since we can in no way gratify you more than by a grateful commemoration of the benefits we have received from you, we will not cease, in returning thanks for them, to have a continual remembrance of you in our petitions to God, that since we ourselves are unable to repay or discharge our debt, he may repay and discharge it [for us] in his Christ.  Moreover, taking fresh occasion from our late experience of your hospitality, we earnestly desire that you should be entreated and prevailed upon, that, in case any reason of importance should arise to drive us from our present abode, we may still meet with some place among you sufficient for our necessities.  In the mean while may the eternal Lord God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the giver of the Holy Ghost, bless you with all spiritual benediction, make you fearers of God, and feared and dreaded by your enemies; may he furnish you, as the constant patrons of gospel truth, with unflinching boldness, courage, and power, to the edification of his whole church, and the glory and power of his holy name!  Amen.  Feb. 3, 1556
          Your most attached,
            ROBERT HORN, Anglus.
            RICHARD CHAMBERS, Anglus.

LETTER LXV. ROBERT HORN AND RICHARD CHAMBERS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Frankfort
Feb. 3, 1556
  Though I had long since intended to write to your reverence, I have been prevented by continued and almost endless engagements, as you know is usual with persons who are constantly changing their place of abode: but thus it has please God to try us, and the necessity of our church required this very thing, that we, who of late enjoyed among you the most entire liberty, together with no small degree of literary repose, are now on the contrary, through the magnitude of our affairs, scarcely able to obtain leisure for writing a single letter.  We will not therefore entertain a doubt but that you will kindly bear with this our tardiness in writing, when you have considered the extent of our necessities, and understood the affection, love, and esteem of our hearts towards you according to our power.  And since we have no other method of expressing it, we think it better to do so late than never by a letter addressed to yourself.  But if we should here attempt to enumerate all the benefits you have conferred upon us, it would probably be too disagreeable to yourself, who prefer rather to be active in doing good, than to have the reputation of it; and it would be also too troublesome a task for ourselves.  For how much should we have to record of your counsel, sympathy, and protection!  You it was, who conciliated to us the good-will of your townsmen, and who procured the munificence of the government to be extended towards us.  Nor did you content yourself merely with obtaining for us the good offices both of your family and your country; but in addition to this, by letters to those at a distance, you occasioned the liberality of other and unknown individuals to be poured out upon us from all quarters.  By your writings also you sought to reach even those our friends at home, by whose kindness we have been supported; and this, that you might not be behind-hand in exciting them to so godly a purpose, and in aiding us that we should not be deprived of their assistance.  It is indeed far more easy for us to relate these benefits than in any measure to requite them.  We therefore commend you and your ministry to God, who will repay you in that day.
  Meanwhile we entreat you to do us this kindness, namely, to take upon yourself the charge of returning, to the whole senate, more suitable and abundant acknowledgments than such as we could include in our scanty and short epistle; and (forasmuch as we cannot look forward to so long and continued a peace as to effect any change in our condition, before a free permission is granted us to return into our country,) most earnestly to entreat them in our behalf, that if there should, by any possibility, arise such a change, as to expel us from our present abode, we may nevertheless once more freely return to, and obtain a quiet sojourn among you.  But we have no fear, either concerning yourself or those excellent men, but that you will grant us this favor.  In the meantime salute in the name of us all your most amiable wife, and at the same time all the ministers of the word among you, our reverend masters Pellican, Bibliander, Gualter, Lavater, Simler, Zuinglius, Haller, Frisius, John ab Ulmis, Stumphius, and others, as your occupations will allow.  We think master Gessner, whose kind offices to us were innumerable, must by no means be passed over; neither must the two Froschovers and their wives, whose extreme kindness towards us demands rather our letters than our salutations: we have at this time however contented ourselves with the latter, because on account of so many engagements we are unable to write more.  The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all!  Amen.  Feb. 3, 1556
          Your very affectionate,
              ROBERT HORN,
              RICHARD CHAMBERS,   Angli.

LETTER LXVI. ROBERT HORN AND RICHARD CHAMBERS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Frankfort
Sept. 19, 1556
  Grace and peace from God our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ!
  We have receive, most excellent master Bullinger, your letter, in which we easily perceive how much you esteem us, and that you are not forgetful of us.  Not indeed that we should have had any doubt upon this point, if you had not written to us at all.  But now, on the perusal of this most delightful letter that you have sent to us, we consider it as most evident, that your regard, fear, and solicitude extends not only to ourselves, but to the whole of our country; by which feelings we hope you will be more effectually stirred up to offer also more fervent prayers to God on our behalf, for the reformation of our church, respecting which we certainly conceive better hopes, in that you, and other men of God like you, are earnest in your prayers for this very thing; whose supplications, for the sake of Jesus Christ our only mediator, cannot be in vain, but acceptable to God, as being sprinkled with the blood of Christ, and inspired (as it were) with the breathings of the Holy Spirit.  We acknowledge your good offices, your labors, your exertions; and we pray the Lord to direct, establish, and confirm all things for the good of the church, the honor of God, and your own comfort.
  The much esteemed master a Lasco still remains at Frankfort, in daily expectation of a summons to bring him back into his own country.  We communicated to him your letter.  As to the matter of Brentius, we only pray that the Lord may compose the dissensions of the church, and multiply its peace.  Nor are there every day wanting those, who, desirous of novelty, by their novel errors impugn the truth.  It is indeed wonderful with how much loquacity, with what proud bombastic philosophy, certainly not “scientific demonstrations” (as he calls them,) but with the swelling blasts of Pelagius, and vain conceits of human wisdom, a certain Justus Velsius has filled the schools, conceded to us by the kindness of the magistracy who preside over this state, with doctrines opposed to the eternal predestination of God.  We send you his conceits: his blasphemies against God, his railings and invectives against master Calvin, (and indeed they are quite severe enough,) we would rather omit mention of then defile our paper with such foul abuse.
  We expect no good news from England: all things seem to be growing worse and worse.  So great is the number of the martyrs, who in their cheerful profession of the word of God are most cruelly dragged to the flames and to torments, that those godly men who, on former occasions, made it their business to inquire into this matter, are now unable to ascertain either the number or the names of the sufferers.  Nor can the ferocity of the queen, and of Bonner the pseudo-bishop of London, and of the other papists, restrain itself, satiated with domestic blood, without moreover crossing the sea, and raging so furiously, that no godly person can now remain at Antwerp in security and free from danger.  Sir [John] Cheke and Sir Peter Carew, both taken by treachery, and carried before the queen, were thrown into prison, but are now, it is said, set at liberty, or are shortly to be so.  But, alas! it is stated, (yet we hope the report is untrue,) that most iniquitous conditions of their restoration to, and enjoyment of, liberty, have been proposed to and accepted by them both.  However it be, we may learn this, that it is vain to place our confidence in man.
  Charles, not yet enough broken by disease, and his sister, together with his son Philip, being about to visit England, I know not for what reason, are recalled while on their very journey.  Neither the nobility or the people will patiently endure the arrival of these princes, nor do they in the mean time dissemble their impatience in this respect; notwithstanding that the queen with some of the nobles of her party are using all their influence and endeavors to aggrandize Philip with the hereditary right of government, the royal crown, and other distinctions; and this, with consent of parliament, as they call it.  In Suffolk, they are proclaiming the lady Elizabeth queen, and they associate lord Courteney as her supporter; by which bold attempt has been occasioned the execution of at least sixty or eighty persons by an ignominious death on the charge of treason.  Respecting the number, however, nothing is known for certain.  it is more certain, that on this account not only the lady Elizabeth, but also the lord Courteney, are brought into suspicion of treason, and in no small peril of their lives: but may God change all things for the better!  Thus much concerning the affairs of our country.
  Still, however, not yet satisfied with these things, we are keeping secret a thing which is rather to be desired than expected.  We will however communicate it to you.  We are in fact desirous of a conference about the affairs of religion; but we are not yet able to affirm for certain whether it will take place.  Should there occur any thing of the kind, we are in hopes that master Calvin will come back again, and that he will have both yourself and other learned men as his companions not only of his journey, but of his labors in this business.  May the eternal Lord God grant this through Christ, that you may, some time or other, being assembled in the fear of God, (with Christ presiding in your council,) set forth at length a pure confession without any stain of error, to the confusion of the adversaries, the peace of the church, and the glory of God; to whose protection we commend you, your wife, family, and all your friends.  Farewell.  Sept. 19, 1556
          Your reverence’s most devoted,
              ROBERT HORN, AND
              RICHARD CHAMBERS.

LETTER LXVII. JAMES PILKINGTON TO RODOLPH GUALTER.
Geneva
April 7, 1556
  Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly!  Health and peace in Christ Jesus!
  Since Paul in all his epistles is so earnest in the salutation of those brethren, whom he perceived to love Christ in sincerity, though many persons think lightly, or rather not at all, of this duty, because it consists only in a few bare words; yet for my part, most illustrious sir, induced by so weighty an example, I can by no means consider it as of no importance.  This being the case, whom can we English salute with greater reason than you, our good masters at Zurich, by whom we have been regarded as brethren? and to whom else can I especially, whom you have so liberally entertained far beyond my other friends, wish grace and life in my frequent and affectionate letters, rather than to yourself?  Your prudence knows how to estimate things according to the intention of the giver, and not according to the value of the gift; and you are able likewise so to compare the power of showing kindness with the opportunities of doing so, as not so much to regard what each may have given: but if you could have been enriched by kind words, I should long since have made you happy; for I am unable to gratify you in any other way.
  You will be much surprised at my departure from you, and not indeed without reason, for I was surprised at it myself; but when I had considered with myself what a people we are, and what we proverbially say of ourselves, that the English will never let well alone.  Allow us, therefore, to be Englishmen, that, when we have learned wisdom to our cost, we may perceive the constant evil of being inconstant.  I do not say this because we have been in need of any thing, or suffered any ill-treatment, but that you may know that we had learned by experience the happiness of living at Zurich; and though we have met with many persons who are willing to do us a service, we have found but few who have shown us the same kind attention as yourselves.  And though it is a great alleviation of sorrow for those who are afflicted to pour out their griefs into the bosom of a faithful friend, who may be able by wholesome counsel and soothing words to relieve their distress, and who will entreat the Lord for them with earnest prayers; I had rather that you should commune with yourself upon the unhappy aspect of our church, (both that portion of it which is oppressed by wolves at home, as well as that which is dispersed abroad,) than that I should attempt to relate what cannot be described.  You have formerly acted a part in this tragedy yourselves, but the Lord has granted you a happy issue: we are now brought upon the stage, that, being humbled by adversity, we may discover him, whom in our prosperity we did not acknowledge as we ought, to be a kind and merciful father.
  Let this my letter, I pray you, salute as affectionately as possible that common father of the afflicted, master Bullinger, to whom, as he so richly deserves, I wish every happiness; and since the Lord has made you witnesses of my affliction go on, as you have begun, to love me, to help me by your counsel, and entreat the Lord for me in your prayers, that I may again be restored to you, when it shall seem him good.  I thank also master Gessner for all his exertions on my behalf, and for the letter full of good advice, which I lately received from him; for by his means, next to the Lord who works all things, the pains in my stomach are daily so decreasing, that I cherish good hopes of regaining my former health.  I have not yet tried any of the remedies which he last prescribed; but should I be compelled to adopt them, I will write to him that he may know their effects.  I commend to you master Parkhurst and his wife, my friends Spenser and Frensham, and would especially desire to be commended to the venerable Pellican, the most learned Bibliander, masters Wolfius, John ab Ulmis, and all the other ministers.  If I can do any thing for you, I am at your service.  May the Lord keep you pure from this world unto his day!  Amen.  Farewell.  Geneva, 7 April, 1556
            Yours, as you so well deserve,
                JAMES PILKINGTON.

LETTER LXVIII. JAMES PILKINGTON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Cevennes
June 27, 1556
  Come, Lord Jesus, quickly!  Since nothing is more foreign to a human being than inhumanity, and humanity adorns a human being more especially from the connection between its name and nature; that you may not with reason think me inhuman because I, whom you have often treated with so much humanity, have not written to you, your humanity has induced me to address you by my letter.  For since the Lord always abhors the ungrateful, who do not acknowledge benefits received, and the ungrateful are odious to mankind themselves; lest I should fall into that fault of my own accord which I had always condemned in others, my duty has required, your dignity demanded, and both together have impelled me to write, that in words at least I  might acknowledge an obligation, which in deed I am unable adequately to discharge.  May you live then, I pray, with all your friends, long and happily; and for the hospitality with which you have so kindly received all the exiles, and with the agreeable recollection of which I delight myself, may the Lord, according to his kindness, for ever bless you.  Continue, moreover, as you have begun, and do honor to yourself and all your friends by your kindness to the exiles: for the Lord is pleased by such offerings, he has them in everlasting remembrance, and can never forget your beneficence towards his proscribed people.  But though your numerous noble actions are quoted by many with much grateful acknowledgment, there is not any thing in which they really rejoice more, than in that you are endeavoring to draw over to you Peter Martyr.  Many persons remark how unbefitting it is, and especially in these times, that the mouth of such a man should be stopped; and many persons are promising themselves great things concerning him, when they perceive how great an accession he will be to the cause of truth in your most free city.  And though it is agreeable and almost necessary to our exiles, that all we English should meet together in the same church, and by our united complaints and ardent prayers importune, supplicate, entreat the Lord on behalf of our ruined church; yet both my inclination leads me to return to you as soon as I hear that he has arrived, and a light occasion will bring me.  Whatever you may wish to know respecting me, the good bearer of this s willing and able to give you faithful intelligence in every respect.  Salute for me my dear master Gualter, with the rest of your fellow-ministers, and especially master Gessner, through whose means, by the blessing of God, I am still living, and daily somewhat improving in health.  May the Lord Jesus continue to preserve you and your church, and in his mercy restore our fallen one!  Amen.  Cevennes.  27th June, 1556
        Yours most deservedly,
            J. PILKINGTON, Anglus.

LETTER LXIX. EARL OF BEDFORD TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Venice
April 26, 1557
  My singular regard for you, and the constant esteem I have ever entertained towards you for the sake of religion, as well as your incredible kindness, experienced by me in many ways when I was at Zurich, have occasioned me, most learned Bullinger, to give this young man this letter to you, as a most assured token of my affection towards you, and as it were a sealed evidence, which I was anxious to afford, of my continued love to you.  And herein I thank you in such wise for your kindness, that I promise to repay it, if I ever have it in my power to oblige you in any respect.  And I would have your regard this as said by me, not as men do, who now-a-days make a certain outward show of words, and a mere parade of serving you, and this, rather that they may seem to be what they assert themselves, than be such in reality; but rather that you may persuade yourself, that it proceeds from a mind altogether sincere and entirely devoted to yourself.  Wherefore, should I ever have it in my power to do you any service, (I am aware how trifling it will be,) yet, trifling as it is, it shall be altogether yours.  but enough of this, and perhaps too much; especially since it is my intention, should not other circumstances intervene to call me elsewhere, to visit you on my return to England, when I shall confirm in person what I can only express now by bare words.
  The young man who bears this letter, has informed me of the death of Conrad Pellican, (of whom I make honorable mention;) which when I heard, I grieved exceedingly as I ought to do, not so much for his sake as for that of the whole church.  For he has most gloriously finished his course in labors, watchings, constant studies, and encouragement of learned men; and at length, by dying as he lived, he is translated to a better life in heaven.  But the church will long regret a man who was every way so perfect; so that while I rejoice on his account, I cannot but grieve most exceedingly for her sake.  But your presence, as I hope and wish, will easily mitigate the occasion of this sorrow; and may Almighty God in his mercy long preserve you safe to his church and to all good men!  Venice, April 26, [1557].
              Your most attached,
                  F. BEDFORD.
  P. S.  Diligently salute, I pray you, my dear friends masters Gessner and Gualter.

LETTER LXX. SIR ANTONY COOK TO PETER MARTYR.
Strasburgh
Jan. 20, 1558
  Unless our friendship, my worthy sir, had been too firmly established to be affected by any light matter, I should probably have been charged with neglect for not having hitherto replied to the most gratifying and courteous letter you sent me by master ------------- ; by the admonition of which, however, I am the more reminded of my duty, and by the repeated perusal of it, from time to time, I console myself in this winter of our calamity.  But I well know your candor, and silence does not always imply forgetfulness.  For what the comic writer asserts with respect to asking advice, that shame forbids it in one quarter, dignity in another, the same may also take place in respect to letter-writing.  For if I were not ashamed to write to you as often as I desire to address you, to hear you, to enjoy your society, not a day would be without its letter.  Besides, since (as you state) more painful and severe trials are daily arising to us, it not only distresses our minds to relate them, but even to think about them.  Such an one is that which we have lately heard concerning Calais, that the town is either taken by the French, or in the greatest danger.  Should we have lost it, I do not choose to conjecture, though it is not difficult to foresee, what mischiefs will ensue, and which, if we would only have been quiet, might so easily have been avoided.  But alas! for our carelessness, or (shall I say?) our blindness; who, though we have treacherously forsaken the Lord, are yet without fear of the punishment due to our wickedness, and denounced against us by the voice of God.
  I wish it were in my power to converse with you at large upon these and other matters, that in the abundance of my grief and tears your learned and godly discourse might afford me comfort.  Frequently indeed have I intended to come and see you, and I may probably pass a month with you during this next Lent.  But do not mention a word of this to any one; for I am not yet sufficiently able to form my plans, and if I should undertake this journey, it will be known to very few persons beforehand.  I pray our Lord Jesus to be pleased to show compassion upon England, in many ways so afflicted, and to aid his troubled church according to the working of that mighty power, whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself.  May God long preserve you in safety to all godly persons!  Strasburgh, Jan. 20, 1558
              Yours wholly,
                ANTONY COOK.

LETTER LXXI. SIR JOHN CHEKE TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Greenwich
June 7, 1553
  Will you then, my Bullinger, strive to be received into my friendship, which I ought rather to have offered, and not wait till it was solicited?  But that which is to be commended in you, I think is blameable in me; for those persons who cultivate real friendships, resemble good husbandmen, and those who receive them, good land.  I therefore, being anticipated by yourself, and also more tardy in cultivating friendships, have the inferior position: for in proportion as the husbandman is superior to the soil he cultivates, in that same proportion am I excelled by yourself.  To bestow a benefit is a virtuous act, to recompense it is a duty; and it is far more blessed to confer a favor than to receive one, yes indeed, than either to be grateful for it, to remember it, or to requite it.  But as your learning, your zeal for true religion, and your published works are universally known, and the affection which I had long since conceived for you had nowise shown itself; you must still bear in mind, that even if my regard had been unknown to you, I have notwithstanding been for a long time your admirer.
  The books which you have written to the king’s majesty, have been as acceptable to him as they deserved to be.  A large portion of them I delivered to him myself, and am able therefore to inform you how kindly and courteously he received them, and how greatly he esteems them; and I can offer you my congratulations upon the subject.  But since the king’s majesty, debilitated by long illness, is scarcely yet restored to health, I cannot venture to make you any promise of obtaining a letter from him to yourself.  But should a longer life be allowed him, (and I hope that he may very long enjoy it,) I prophesy indeed, that, with the Lord’s blessing, he will prove such a king, as neither to yield to Josiah in the maintenance of true religion, nor to Solomon in the management of the state, nor to David in the encouragement of godliness.  And whatever may be effected by nature or grace, or rather by God the source of both, whose providence is not even contained within the limits of the universe, it is probable that he will not only contribute very greatly to the preservation of the church, but also that he will distinguish learned men by every kind of encouragement.  He has long since given evidence of these things, and has accomplished at this early period of his life more numerous and important objects, than others have been able to do when their age was more settled and matured.  He has repealed the act of the six articles; he has removed images from the churches; he has overthrown idolatry; he has abolished the mass, and destroyed almost every kind of superstition.  he has put forth by his authority an excellent form of common prayer; he has published good and pious homilies to lessen the ignorance of uneducated ministers.  He has invited the most learned men to teach at the universities, and has done many other things of the same kind, every one of which would be considered as a great action in other men, but as nothing in him, by reason of the magnitude of what he has accomplished.  Besides this, he has lately recommended to the schools by his authority the catechism of John, bishop of Winchester, and has published the articles of the synod at London, which if you will compare with those of Trent, you will understand how the spirit of the one exceeds that of the other.  Why should I say more?  I send you the book itself as a token of my regard, and believe me yours in Christ.  Fare thee well.  Greenwich, June 7, 1553  7 Ed. VI.
          Yours in the Lord,
            JOHN CHEKE.
  Salute, I pray you, masters Rodolph Gualter, and Conrad Gessner, to whom I am shortly about to write.

LETTER LXXII. SIR JOHN CHEKE TO JOHN CALVIN.
Strasburgh
Oct. 20, 1555
  At one and the same instant I have been informed of the arrival of master de Sancto Andrea and of his departure.  I am anxious, however, to address a few words to you.  As far as I can perceive, I shall pass the winter in this place, enjoying in this my exile the society of my old friends, from whose kindly intercourse I shall not willingly withdraw myself.  I rejoice that the Lord has delivered you not only from the violent illness with which you were afflicted, but also from a calamity which would have been utterly fatal both to your church and state.  Though these events are now of long standing, yet they are new to me, who now hear of them for the first time.  I therefore heartily thank God for having afforded these extraordinary and remarkable manifestations of his providence to others, that he may call forth their faith and veneration of himself.  Nothing is more effectual in bringing over the minds of our enemies to entertain correct thoughts respecting God, than when godly persons are defended by his protection against the snares and machinations of the wicked.
  And I pray that in this general confusion and overthrow the Lord may afford some aid and assistance to wretched England, wherein there are very many manifestations of his most heavy displeasure, and but very few of his goodness and mercy.  For good men, and, what is yet more distressing, those who take the lead in learning and authority, by whose counsels and prudence many and important measures have been effected in the church, are not only brought in danger of their lives, but are actually under condemnation, and are daily expecting a death, which though desirable to themselves, will yet be lamentable and disastrous to the church.  These ought by their example and constancy not only to give encouragement to those of the present age, but to afford an eminent example of future generations.  Among whom, Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer, the bishops of Canterbury, London, and formerly of Worcester, having firmly and boldly persevered in the Christian doctrine they had embraced, and not allowing themselves to be led away from it by the terror of punishment, death, and the flames, are now condemned, and degraded, as they call it; and are either, I understand, already burned, or are shortly to experience the power of the flames and the cruelty of their tyrants.  It is most painful and distressing to us to be deprived of those, whom, if God should be pleased to effect any alteration of affairs in our wretched and now greatly ruined England, we should not be able, or at least should hardly be able, to dispense with.
  But why should I mention these things to you, who are well aware that this example of constancy and fortitude will tend to strengthen the universal church, scattered as it is far and wide, and that the living cannot be so useful by their teaching, as the dead can by their example?  But I must confess, and, humanly speaking, I am confirmed in my opinion, that what Paul said respecting his own life, I think may be applied to them, if this divine chastisement were to have a respite and cessation in England, and to bring us away from ungodly worship to true Christianity.  But what must we expect from God in this slaughter of godly men?  It may be that our people, like the Amorites, must fill up the measure of their impiety, that the more heavy severity of divine justice may be exercised upon them.  But whatever be the Lord’s purpose, whom I ought to obey and not prescribe to, I know and believe that he will effect it in such a way as that all things may tend to the good of his elect, whose support and protection he undertakes.  So that I feel less anxious about whatever may happen, and think it my duty so to judge of the Lord’s purpose, as to consider it replete with wisdom and goodness, and that it neither can, nor ought to be, either amended or found fault with, by our opinions or powers.
  You see how, when I am writing to a friend, I write every thing that comes into my mind.  But while you are wearied by my prolixity, pardon my freedom, who am less careful in writing to those who love me, as not fearing reproof where the offense is rather worthy of pardon than censure.  May the Lord preserve you for yourself and for me, and his church!  Salute, I pray you, master Stafford, and his wife and family, and also his host of St. Jerome’s with whom he sojourns; and your friend the marquis, if he has yet returned to you, Normandy, masters Budæus, Parr, and your brother.  Strasburgh, Oct. 20, 1555
              Your most devoted,
                  JOHN CHEKE.

LETTER LXXIII. SIR JOHN CEKE TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
March 12, 1556
  Our people frequently converse respecting the kindness not of yourself alone, but also that of men of all classes, and of your whole commonwealth, towards the English who came to reside among you by reason of the change of religion in their own country.  I consider this not kindness merely, but hospitality, to be especially acceptable to God, and approved of men; and that it will never perish from the memory of any of our countrymen.  As to  me, should I ever have it in my power to render any service to yourself, or your godly friends, or your commonwealth, I pledge myself to be so ready to perform it, as that the anxiety of a grateful mind and the desire of returning an obligation may evidently appear.  I ought also upon other grounds to show both to yourself, and to masters Bibliander and Bernardine, as much respect as is due to  learned, pious, and friendly persons, who have deserved well of the church of Christ.  This your hospitality, therefore, is not only praise-worthy in itself, but is yet more so by comparison with the ill-treatment of others.  For I suppose you are not ignorant, that those parties who maintain the body of Christ to be every where can nowise endure the members of Christ to be any where, and have harassed them with all kinds of cruelty and atrocity, in order that with the absurdity of the opinions they have imbibed they may also join a savageness of disposition, and a brutal ferocity towards the meek children of God.  But if the truth of opinions is to be judged of by their fruits, and there is as wide a difference between men’s sentiments as there is in the Christian life, truly they ought to have been long since convinced, and to have given up so stubborn an opinion.  But of the stupidity of these parties at another time.  May God enlighten their blinded mind with the light of his Spirit, and bring them out from this thick darkness of error to a better perception of the truth, and a more harmonious consent of feelings.
  I hear that Ignatius has been sent to you to be translated and printed, a measure which I suppose has been adopted for certain reasons.  I had seen the book at Augsburgh, and had copied out some passages where the name of the mass was mentioned, and where he speaks of the wives of the apostles.  I request you, my Bullinger, and implore you again and again, to take care that the Greek be printed together with the translation.  For it is of very great importance to scholars to read the author himself in his own language, and especially where grave and controverted matters are to be considered.  I never read a translation without requiring the author himself as an interpreter of it.  And I wish this had been done, not only in this author, but in all others, and in Procopius.  It would have removed suspicion in regard to many passages, which appear to have been introduced by the translator, where the meaning of certain Hebrew and Latin words is discussed by a Greek unacquainted with those languages.  But now translations are so obtruded upon us, to the depreciation of the authors themselves, that there must of necessity arise that inconvenience which the papists object to us in the eucharist, namely, that we use the antitypes instead of the prototypes.  Wherefore, if you will take care that good authors, when put in print, shall either be printed with the translations, as master Gesner has properly done in Stobæus and others; or even separately, if that should be thought more expedient, lest the translations only should be cried up, and the authors themselves perish; you will confer many and important benefits both on the present and succeeding generation.
  You see with what familiarity I address you:  forgive me, I was only intending to salute you, and to thank you for your kindness towards our people; but when Ignatius and the other authors of whom we are deprived came into my mind, I could not but commend to you the cause of those authors, and entreat you, as it were, in their name not to suffer them to speak only through interpreters, when they might readily be seen and heard by many in their own language, and he rescued from the danger of destruction which usually attends the Greek writers.  Should there be any thing in which I can be of use to you, pray command me:  and I beg you to say the same from me to masters Bibliander and Bernardine.  I wish an opportunity were afforded me of performing these my promises.  Salute, I pray you, the good old man, master Pellican, masters Rodolph Gualter, Conrad Gesner, and especially your wife.  May the Lord preserve you!  Strasburgh.  March 12, 1556
          Your friend and brother in Christ,
                JOHN CHEKE.

LETTER LXXIV. SIR RICHARD MORISON TO JOHN CALVIN.
Strasburgh
April 17, 1555
  If Cheke has sinned against your kindness, so I cannot but confess, most learned Calvin, that I have now for many months acted in the same manner.  He can aggravate my fault, but can nowise acquit me, nor I him, from the charge of neglect.  Nay, there is rather reason to fear that you should withdraw the hospitality you have so kindly afforded to the English.  Is it for this that you have given up to us your house, and become a mere tenant in your own home, that in so many months from that time you should receive from me not a single atom of gratitude?  I am writing to the marquis; and if there is nothing in that quarter to clear me in your eyes, I know with whom I have to do, and had rather acknowledge my fault, than offer you a new injury while I in vain attempt to palliate the old one.  And yet you must know that I have written to him nothing but what is true, namely, that I and mine are at this very time exposed to the greatest danger, and that there are not wanting those who wish me either to return home, or, like an outcast, to pass the life of an exile in a foreign country.  And as I am not wanting in friends, who make other promises, so I am afraid that my bitter enemies will do more to injure me, than my lukewarm friends will do towards the restoration of my affairs.  As to what is going on at home, since every one knows it, I suppose that you cannot be ignorant.  This our friend Luke will easily tell you all that I know.  I must tell you in the last place, that I had rather requite your deeds by corresponding deeds on my part, then seem to wish to recompense your exceeding kindness by a verbal acknowledgement.  Luke will tell you the rest.  Farewell, most courteous Calvin, and forgive me, I know not whether to say my silence, or my tedious letter.  Strasburgh, April 17, 1555
        Yours heartily,
          RICHARD MORISON.

LETTER LXXV. SIR RICHARD MORISON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Aug. 23, 1555
  I had been informed, most learned Bullinger, before the arrival of your letter, that it had been decreed, both by the authority of the chief magistrate, and the order of the senate, that no foreigners newly come should be admitted within your city: not indeed that foreigners are not most kindly received by you, and when received, treated with the greatest hospitality.  But the necessity of this enactment has been solely occasioned by the influx among you at this time of Italians from Lugarno being so great, as hardly to leave room in your city for any new guest.  When these things were related to me, as my friend Bernardine had not then written an answer to our friends here, the winter too threatening a true German frost, I considered it to be my next best plan, not to decline the house voluntarily offered here, and which by reason of the garden adjoining is very convenient.  For it seemed to be quite time to procure wood, and hay, and other things necessary either for the support of a family, or for guarding against the cold: for among the people of Strasburgh, when the cold regulates the price of wood, scarcely an ounce is offered for sale; and when it is sold, you would scarcely be able to procure it at the most exorbitant price.  I would ask you therefore, again and again, that if I have been at all to blame in this matter, you would pardon me for having caused you to wait upon the most illustrious chief magistrate to no purpose; unless I knew for certain that you would easily pardon me both this and far greater faults: although what is not done at this time can easily be arranged at the beginning of spring, should not our affairs induce us to return to England.  Do you, meanwhile, only let the chief magistrate understand, as regards myself, that I have not changed my purpose through any want of decision, but that I was of great necessity compelled to put it off to another time.  This, indeed, is some part of the inconvenience, which men who are compelled to undergo a voluntary exile are wont to suffer, that when they desire above all things to arrange their affairs with some degree of certainty, they are seldom or never rightly able to effect this.  Unforeseen events are so apt to disarrange all our purposes and designs with the greatest ease.
  This anti-Paul, Paul of the apostasy, the servant of the devil, this antichrist newly created at Rome, thinks it but a very small plunder that is offered to him, that he is again permitted in England to tyrannise over our consciences, unless the revenues be restored to the monasteries, that is, the pigsties; the patrimony, as he calls it, of the souls which are now serving in the filth of purgatory.  Our ambassadors, who went to Rome for the purpose of bringing back the wolf upon the sheep of Christ, are now with the emperor, and bring us these demands of the chief pontiff:  God grant that he may urge them in every possible way!  Perhaps those who have suffered the gospel of Christ, that is, the sceptre by which Christ both governs his kingdom and extends its borders, to be taken from them by threats, will not allow their revenues, the life and blood of mankind, to be taken away, even by force.  At all events, that will come to pass which Almighty God knows to be best for his people.  If Socrates was accustomed to make no definite request from the gods, shall it be a great thing for us to depend altogether upon the good pleasure of God our Father?  Since he is our Father, he cannot for ever be angry with his children.  Nay rather, when he has an assurance of our improvement, he will then certainly think of punishing both his enemies, and ours for his sake.  Saul sought to destroy David, but did no more than attempt so great a crime.  Among us, how many living members of Christ are thrown into the flames!  Saul, who was his own murderer, saw his three sons slain in one day; and shall Winchester always live?  Shall he live to increase, and not to lay aside his boldness?  God lives, and is no less a hater of wickedness now than he has ever been heretofore.  But I must conclude.  Farewell, excellent Bullinger, and love me.  Strasburgh, Aug 23, 1555
            Yours as you so well deserve,
                RICHARD MORISON.

LETTER LXXVI. THOMAS LEVER TO ROGER ASCHAM.
unknown
unknown
  Your friends, masters Nevinson, Alen, Butts, the king’s physician, and Redman, have departed this life since I last wrote to you.  Dr. Bill, the master of our college, has by his majesty’s favor succeeded Redman in Trinity college, and I have succeeded Bill in St. John’s college.  Dr. Redman died of consumption after a long illness, in constant expectation of death, and in continual discourse respecting God and true religion, as one who ardently desired to be delivered from the prison of this body, and to be with Christ.
  I will communicate to you, my Ascham, a part of the communication which John Yong (who, as you heard at Cambridge last year, was the most violent opponent of Bucer in the public schools) received in person from the mouth of Dr. Redman immediately before his death.  First, Redman was requested, as Yong himself informed me, by himself and the other leaned men standing by, to deliver his opinion upon certain points of religion; whereupon he forthwith undertook his real sentiments, upon any subject that they might think proper to propose.  Being asked what he thought of the see of Rome, he answered, that it was a sink of wickedness, whence was derived the stream of filthiness which had burst forth like a torrent upon the church of God.  Being asked his opinion respecting purgatory, he said that there was not any such purgatory as the one imagined by the schoolmen; but that when Christ shall come, surrounded by fire, all who meet him will be purified, as I believe, said he, myself, and as many of the ancient doctors are of opinion.  Being questioned respecting the mass, he said, that those who regard the mass as a sacrifice for the dead, are opposed to Christ himself, and to the benefit of his death.  As to the proposition concerning justification by faith only, he declared it to be a delightful doctrine, and certainly full of comfort, provided it were understood of a true and living faith; and that no works were deserving of eternal life, not even works of grace in the person justified.  When he was asked his opinion respecting transubstantiation, he replied that he had for the last twelve years directed all his studies and attention to that subject, and had remarked that the writings of Tertulian, Irenæus, and Origen were openly opposed to that doctrine, and that it was neither maintained nor delivered in other ancient writers: and when he had long and vainly expected to find some certain and undoubted statement upon that subject in the writings of the schoolmen, he discovered in them nothing whatever sound and solid, but only deceit and gross error.  With respect to the presence, he said (as Yong related the conversation), that Christ was really and corporally present in the sacrament: but when he was asked whether that was the body of Christ, which we see the priest lift up, he affirmed, that the body of Christ was now incapable of being lifted up or let down by any human hands; and it is, he added, a very corrupt custom to carry about the sacrament to be adored.  He affirmed also that the wicked do not receive the body of Christ, but the sacrament of it.  He earnestly exhorted Yong diligently to read the bible itself, and to beware of the doctrine of men.  He added, moreover, that it was an excellent book which the most reverend archbishop of Canterbury had lately written upon the eucharist, and he recommended Yong to read it with much attention.  Yong told me himself, “As heretofore,” saith he, “I myself would have encountered death with willingness and alacrity, in defense of the doctrine of the incarnation of Christ himself; so it shall be my endeavor for the future that all my studies and opinions may rest upon a more solid foundation than that common agreement of individuals, which they have erroneously denominated the church.”
  I hope, my Ascham, that not Yong only, but many persons will be led away from the doctrine of men to the true religion of Christ, by means of this divine discourse of Redman just before his death.

LETTER LXXVII. THOMAS LEVER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Geneva
April 11, 1554
  Much health in Christ Jesus.  On the first night of our journey we arrived at Lentzburg, when father Gervase, having read your letter to him, seemed to me to pour out upon us, as though we were his dearest friends, the admirable benevolence of a pious mind.  For he brought us in the evening from the public inn, and took us to the delightful quiet of his own house; and early the next morning he accompanied us for two hours on our way, and so exactly pointed out to us the description of the road, and the names of godly persons (in our route), that profiting by their advice, and by the marks previously pointed out to us, we arrived at Berne without any difficulty.  We were there informed that Musculus, Haller, and other learned men were exceedingly well disposed, and, in consequence of your letter to Haller, were ready to afford us any assistance: for many of them being assembled in the same house invited us to a good supper.  Haller too, in addition to supplying us liberally with a gratuitous lodging for three days, took us every day to whatever we wished to see or hear.  At Lausanne also Beza and Viret proved both by word and deed, that we were recommended and made welcome in consequence of your letter to them.  At last, however, on the seventh of April, we reached Geneva, where, in the absence of Calvin, to whom I stated that you had given me a letter, we were immediately received as guests by a pious and worthy man, who is expecting Calvin to return within these few days.  I perceive, therefore, and acknowledge, that your fatherly care for me not only provided for myself and my companion a most delightful lodging in your own house, but has also procured for us in other places and with other persons favor and kindness far beyond our expectation.  And for this cause, which next to God I attribute to yourself, I have long since begun to consider myself not so much a traveler exiled from my country, as a fellow-citizen of the saints now sojourning in the household of God.
  I now therefore feel no anxiety respecting myself, but an almost incurable solicitude for those whom I suspect to be overwhelmed by most grievous perils at home.  For a certain Englishman, passing through Berne, wrote to his countrymen at Geneva, that the Bernese government had been informed by a letter sent to them from the court of the king of France, that the queen of England had been slain by a mob, exasperated by her perfidious cruelty.  Another person, however, who left London on the 13th of March, has to-day informed me that no priests were executed in the rebellion raised by Wyatt, and that very few were put to death after his apprehension.  He said that only the duke of Suffolk and his daughter lady Jane, with her husband, were beheaded, and that they all continued steadfast in the profession of the true religion.  He affirmed too, that he had heard it for a certain fact, that Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury, Ridley, bishop of London, Latimer, a very celebrated preacher, and [sir James] Hales, a pious lawyer, had all been removed together from London to Oxford, to be burnt at the stake, after having been condemned for heresy by the doctors of that university.  From all these circumstances I can only conclude, that either, if the queen is alive, there is a most grievous persecution of the church; or if a turbulent mob have the upper hand, the kingly government in England will be irrecoverably lost.  But the hardness of my heart, which ever prevents my melting into tears, either of commiseration for these calamities, or of repentance for my own misdoings, is often wont to disturb my mind, to blunt my temper, and to confuse my memory.  Wherefore I pray you, my father, in the bowels of Jesus Christ, to invoke with me my heavenly Father in my behalf, that regarding our miseries, the merits of Christ, and his own mercies, he may pardon me my neglect and wickedness, take away my hardness of heart, and bestow upon me the Spirit of repentance and sanctification.  Give, I pray you, from myself and Hugo my companion, our salutations and very many thanks to your wife and all your family.  And I again request you to salute in my name the venerable old men, Pellican and Bibliander, and the other learned and pious men, Gualter, Gesner, Lewis [Lavater], Zuingler and Zuinglius.  May Christ long preserve you for the benefit of his church!  Farewell.  Geneva, April 11
                Your son,
                  THOMAS LEVER.

LETTER LXXVIII. THOMAS LEVER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Geneva
April 23, 1554
  Much health in Christ.  As I told you before, so I now also acknowledge myself very much indebted to your fatherly foresight, through which, by means of your letter, I received from many persons to whom I was unknown the greatest kindness on my travels.  No fresh tidings have reached me from England, except the contradiction of those rumors by which it was stated here for some days that the queen had been murdered.  For she is still alive, persevering and increasing in wickedness.
  I hear that some Englishmen have come to you at Zurich, together with that very godly man, Richard Chambers: I am sorry that they have reached you sooner than my letter could reach them.  For Richard Chambers is the person who has actively devoted himself and all his property to provide for the safety of the ministers during this persecution; and, though my journey ought to have diminished his labors, yet the vain expectation of a letter from me has increased both his toil and anxiety.  But Christ, through whom all things work together for good to them that love God, will turn this also to the honor of God, and the comfort of those who seek the glory of Christ with all their heart.  I hope therefore that the opportunity now afforded you by God of manifesting your kindness towards true Christians, faithful ministers, and wretched exiles, will not prove unacceptable, and that the contemplation of your church worshipping God with such holiness and purity will not be without benefit to them.  Take care, I pray you, that the letter addressed to the above-named Richard Chambers, Englishman, may speedily be delivered to him.  Forget me not, I entreat you, in your prayers to God.  Master Calvin, like many others, was more favorably disposed towards me for your sake; whence you may understand that you are now much indebted to many for my sake.  I will always do what alone is in my power, namely, entreat God long to preserve you for the benefit of his church.  Farewell.  Geneva, April 23
            Your most devoted son in Christ,
                  THOMAS LEVER.

LETTER LXXIX. THOMAS LEVER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Geneva
June 28, 1554
  Much health in Christ Jesus.  The fatherly benevolence and kindness which you have manifested towards me since my arrival in these parts, as an exile from my native land for the sake of religion, has mitigated my distress at leaving my country, and enabled me with cheerfulness to bear the cross of Christ.  It has also been of great service to others of my countrymen; and I cannot doubt of its continuance towards us, because I seem to myself to perceive, not our merits, but your kindness, in your continual favors conferred upon us.  When indeed I received a little book and letter from you not long since, in both which I may daily hear, by the perusal of them, the words and voice of my most esteemed father in Christ; I considered it as an admonition and encouragement to me, to proceed and advance with the diligence of a son in the path of your paternal piety and instruction.  And in truth that book seems, not only to myself, but to very many other pious and learned persons, to be worthy of being translated into many languages.  Peter Tonvillanus, the bearer of this letter, has translated it into French, and left it here to be printed, as he was called from this place to advance the cause of the gospel in Poland.  And since in my familiar intercourse with him I have found him to be a learned, godly, and honorable man, I have willingly entrusted him with this letter to you, by which he hopes likewise to become better acquainted with you, and on a more intimate footing.  Your kindness towards all persons of this character will not allow him to be disappointed of his hope.  Should my friend Spenser not return, master John ab Ulmis will, I hope, take care that your annotations on the lesser prophets, or any other that you may have entrusted him with for me, may be copied out.  For as I desire nothing more fervently than such writings of yours, I earnestly requested master John ab Ulmis, by letter, to lend me his assistance in this matter; with which request I hope he will faithfully comply.
  We have had of late no news from England, except that persecution still continues, or rather increases.  May God have pity upon us, and sending power from above may he put forth such laborers into his harvest, who may thrust out the foxes from his vineyard, England!
  Salute, I pray you, in my name, your wife and the rest of your family, to all of whom I always wish the choicest blessings in Christ.  May the Lord long preserve you to us and to the church of Christ!  Farewell.  Geneva, June 28
            Your most devoted son in Christ,
                  THOMAS LEVER.

LETTER LXXX. THOMAS LEVER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Geneva
Jan. 17, 1555
  Much health in Christ Jesus.  For that true fatherly affection and beneficence, which you have manifested both towards the other Englishmen who are in exile for the cause of religion, and also to myself, as though I were your own son, I cannot sufficiently return due and adequate thanks; but as far as is in our power, we will earnestly and prayerfully entreat God for yourself, for the church committed to your charge, for your family, and for all your friends.  May God grant that we may sometime prove by our actions, that we have learned from you to treat with affection, and courtesy, and benevolence, those who are wandering about for the cause of Christ!
  Since you have conducted yourself as a father to me, receive, I pray you, from me as from your son an account of my manner of living and of my studies.  I am residing here free and unfettered by any public employment.  I attend all the sermons and lectures of Calvin, and some of those of other persons, and have hitherto employed the remainder of my time in the publication of a little book in our vernacular English; it is now in the press, and, God willing, will shortly be sent to England.  After I shall have sent forth this book, I have determined to bestow as much time and attention as I can upon the study of the prophets.  I should certainly proceed in that study with greater alacrity and advantage, if I were able sometimes by any means to consult you.  Wherefore, my reverend father, who have never refused me any thing hitherto, P pray you now to impart to my friend, master Spenser, some of your writings which may conduce to the understanding of the prophets, and which are not yet printed; so that he may get them copied out for me, in the same manner as he is nor procuring me what you are writing upon the Revelation of St. John.
  I have not at this time any thing new or important to write to you about: whatever reports there may be, you may, if you choose, hear more easily from the relation of this messenger, than from my letter.  For he is a pious and worthy man, by name Richard Harvel; and having left England, his country, for the sake of religion and learning, he is anxious to see and converse with you.  Such has been my intimacy with him here at Geneva, as to make me wish that this recommendation of mine may be of use to him.
  Salute, I pray you, your very dear wife, as my own mother, and that worthy matron who ministered to us English, like the mother of a family, when we were all together under the same roof.  May God long preserve you to us for the benefit of the church of Christ!  Farewell.  Geneva, Jan. 17
          Your attached in Christ,
              THOMAS LEVER.

LETTER LXXXI. THOMAS LEVER TO HENRY BULLINGER
Frankfort
Feb. 12, 1555
  Everlasting health in Christ Jesus!  As I always found in you, when I was at Zurich, godly counsel, learning, and example, to my exceeding comfort and advantage, so now, most revered father in Christ, I hope that I shall obtain the benefit of your pious prayers for the edification of the church of Christ of the English at Frankfort.  And as many others of my countrymen regard you as their patron, so do I acknowledge you to have been a father to myself, as I hope and desire that you will continue to be.  And since I perceive that I am destitute of all power and opportunity of returning my obligations, I write this, that you may understand me to be neither unmindful nor ungrateful.
  There is no certain intelligence from England; but I have heard from uncertain rumors, that the queen has never been pregnant, and that the council, which they call the parliament, was suddenly dissolved; and this, because the king not only rejected, but treated with contempt, three petitions preferred by the magistrates; one of which was, that he should restore the true religion, the second, that he should make peace with France, and the third, that he should not admit into his councils any one born out of England.  I understand that more persons are seeking comfort from empty reports than from true repentance.  Do not think it a trouble to salute my mother your wife in my name, together with the rest of your family, to all of whom I shall ever wish every blessing.  May the Lord Jesus long preserve you for the welfare of his church!  Farewell.  Frankfort, Feb. 12
        Your most devoted son in Christ,
              THOMAS LEVER.

LETTER LXXXII. THOMAS LEVER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Jan. 4, 1556
  Much health in Christ Jesus!  While I was so engaged at Geneva, both in my private studies, and in hearing the discourses of the preachers in the public congregation, as that nothing at that time seemed to be more desirable both for my own individual improvement and the edifying of the church; some of my fellow-countrymen, who were banished from England on account of religion, and had settled at Wesel, sent a letter to me, wherein it was stated that by the majority of their votes, and the common and united consent of them all, in a free election, I had been chosen as their pastor.  They therefore earnestly entreated me by letter, and implored me in Christ, that I would neither decline the charge which God (in answer to their prayers, and overruling their votes) had imposed upon me, nor delay my journey to them, who were anxiously expecting me.  For since their late pastor had already left them of his own accord, and the magistrates had forbidden them the use of the sacraments, they hoped to be enabled by my arrival both to have a minister, and re-obtain the permission of the magistrates for the free use of the sacraments, or at least that they should receive some useful and necessary counsel.  Having therefore perused their letter to this effect, and with prayer to God, after consulting master Calvin and my pious and learned brother-ministers of the church of England, I am now on my road from Geneva to Wesel; entertaining such a view both of their state and condition, and of my own slander abilities, as that I am persuaded that I ought neither to undertake the office of their minister, nor yet to refuse any diligence or labor of instructing them.  For the ministerial office neither seems to myself, nor to others whom I have consulted, to be capable of being exercised either with or among those to whom the ministry of the sacraments is forbidden: and indeed I do not as yet find in myself those qualities which the word of God declares should exist in a minister.  Whatever gifts of God I may discover in myself, I shall never refuse, by God’s help, to impart all of them freely and diligently to my brethren in Christ at their request.  In accordance therefore with your fatherly goodwill towards me (which I have so often experienced from our first acquaintance unto this present moment) I entreat you, my reverend father, in the bowels of Christ, to continue always mindful of me in your prayers to God; and sometimes too by your letters to me to advise and instruct me, as your son, how I may better learn to serve Christ and his church with humility, alacrity, and fidelity.  And as I have no means of repaying you, I will diligently endeavor in my daily prayers to obtain for you and yours every blessing from God.
  I pray you likewise to salute in my name masters Peter Martyr, Bernardine Ochinus, Gualter, and the other ministers of your church; to all of whom, for your kindness to myself and to my countrymen, I acknowledge myself your debtor to the utmost extent of my power.  Salute too, I pray you, from me in the Lord your wife and all your family, and lastly, that worthy matron who attended upon us English, or rather, supported us in the same house.  May God long preserve you to the edifying of the church of Christ, and the overthrow of the kingdom of antichrist!  Farewell.  Strasburgh, on my journey, Jan. 4
            Yours faithfully in Christ,
                THOMAS LEVER.

LETTER LXXXIII. THOMAS LEVER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Berne
May 12, 1556
  Much health in Christ Jesus, with my warmest thanks for your constant fatherly kindness and good-will towards me.  And though you have often bestowed many favors upon me, yet nothing could have ever happened to me more acceptably, or agreeably, than that by my reliance on your advice, and by making use of your letter, I have at length met with an asylum where my very dear countrymen and brethren in Christ, who are exiled from their country for their avowed and faithful profession of Christ, may by reason of the same profession be kindly and willingly received.  For master Haller, upon the receipt of your letter, so advocated our cause, first, with many of the senators of Berne collectively and individually, and at last in a full assembly in the senate itself, that there is now permitted us the liberty of sojourning in any part of the Bernese territory.  And master Haller requires or rather recommends us, that after we have examined a number of localities, we should return to Berne to make known to them what place within their territory will best suit us, that we may receive from the magistrates of Berne themselves especial letters of commendation to the mayor and inhabitants of that place.  With regard too to the free use of the word of God, and of the sacraments, and also with respect to the manufacture of English cloth, when the subject was mentioned, the Bernese seemed candidly to acknowledge, that this was the very art which they wished us to exercise among them, and that there would be no difficulty in our obtaining permission from them.  I am expecting therefore to-day a general letter from the magistrates of that state to all who are under their authority; on the receipt of which I have resolved to set out to-morrow on a journey to the English at Basle, that I may consult together with them upon the hastening all the rest who are still loitering on their road towards Basle, and upon surveying the district around Berne, with the view of discovering and providing the most suitable place of residence.  I pray you therefore and beseech you in Christ, that, as you have hitherto done, so you will always continue (whenever God may give you an opportunity) to pour out abundantly upon me your paternal kindness.  I should wish indeed to have placed myself with my friends under your wings, had it been possible in the territory of Zurich.  But not what I will, but what our heavenly Father willeth, will be done: to him be all honor and glory, and to us mercy and salvation in Christ Jesus!  Do not, I pray you, be displeased at my asking you to salute your wife as my own mother, and all the rest of your family as most dear to me in Christ in domestic love.  I do not so much ask, as I wish and hope, that you will always be ready to give me advice upon such matters as you think may tend to the glory of God, and to the comfort and edification of me and mine in Christ Jesus.  Farewell.  Berne, May 12
  Let us pray for each other.
        Your son faithfully in Christ Jesus,
                THOMAS LEVER.

LETTER LXXXIV. THOMAS LEVER TO RODOLPH GUALTER.
Basle
May 27, 1556
  Jesus Christ God with us!  Much health in Christ Jesus.  Your great kindness, and the very prudent advice you gave me in your house at Zurich, was an exceeding comfort to me; and your letter to master Steiger for the magistrates and senate of Berne has been of great service to our cause.  That you may not be wanting in an opportunity of persevering in your godly commiseration and diligent attention to us, behold! we are daily coming into greater difficulties and tribulations.  For we English, after our banishment from England, our removal from Wesel, and wanderings over almost all Germany, have suffered a repulse in Basle, and are at length compelled to have recourse to the hospitality of the people of Berne.  For the councilors of king Ferdinand, who are at Emsen, will not allow any Englishmen, who are exiles for the sake of religion, liberty of passage through that territory of Ferdinand which lies between Strasburgh and Basle.  Whence you may easily perceive the length, fatigue, expense, difficulty and danger of our journey, and how greatly we are in need of protection, advice, liberality and assistance.  Remember us, therefore, I entreat you, in your prayers to God, and in your correspondence and conversation with such individuals as you may know to be both able and willing to aid us in the cause of Christ.  Farewell.  Salute, I pray you, master Parkhurst and his wife.  The bearer is in haste.  Again farewell.  Basle, May 27
            Yours faithfully in Christ,
                  THOMAS LEVER.

LETTER LXXXV. THOMAS LEVER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Arau
Sept. 18, 1556
  Jesus Christ God with us!  Much health in Christ Jesus.  I have lately received two letters from your reverence, and your truly useful and delightful book for the use of the English church in this place.  We plainly perceive therein your true fatherly affection towards us, and must candidly acknowledge, that while we promise you as much as will ever be in our power, we are utterly unable adequately to return our thanks.  And as it is a father’s nature to rejoice when he beholds his children profiting by his instruction and kindness, and eagerly and successfully making progress towards piety and happiness; so hall it be our earnest endeavor both to derive this advantage from your writings, and to afford you the happiness of observing our improvement.
  And now to discourse with you somewhat familiarly respecting myself, I would have you assured that your advice with respect to not contending about things indifferent was exceedingly gratifying to me.  For I had previously come to the same determination myself, and, being now supported by your authority, shall persevere with much greater firmness and alacrity in taking care to avoid offenses and useless controversies; so that every thing may be more easily and effectually accommodated to the peace, and concord, and edification of the church.  For when I sent my friend master Richard Burcher to Berne, to consult master John Haller with respect to the use of ceremonies here in our church, I pointed out the reasons which induced me to wish that leavened bread might be used in the administration of the Lord’s supper; but in the mean time I was unwilling either to prefer any petition to the government, or to act in all respects as I was empowered to do, but only in reference to such things as seemed in his judgment both lawful and expedient.  And indeed he wrote back the very same advice that I received from you in your letter; so that I shall readily follow your suggestion not on this subject only, but also upon any thing else which with your wonted piety and discretion you may recommend or advise to be done or to be abstained from:  and I pray you to write me word at the very first moment you have to spare, what you think I ought to do.  If a man wishes to marry the sister of his deceased wife, or if he has already done so, ought he to retain her or send her away?  I request also that you will peruse this little book upon the church discipline of the English at Geneva, and let me know your candid opinion of it.  You see how boldly, relying upon your clemency and kindness, I address your reverence, whom I know to be always engaged in numerous and important affairs.  You must therefore defer compliance with my request until a suitable opportunity of leisure shall occur.  All the English who are here most cordially salute your reverence in Christ, and we all of us beg to offer our best acknowledgements for your letter and the book.
  Salute, I pray you, in my name, the ministers of your church and all your family, for all of whom I shall always remember to pray to God, and for you especially, that you may enjoy long life, and ability to adorn the church of Christ, to the confusion of antichrist, and to our comfort.  Farewell.  Arau, Sept. 18
        Your most devoted in Christ,
              THOMAS LEVER.

LETTER LXXXVI. THOMAS LEVER TO RODOLPH GUALTER.
Arau
Aug. 11, 1557
  Jesus Christ God with us!  Much health in Christ Jesus.  After a long and wearisome tossing about I at length seem to myself to have arrived with some of my friends at Arau, as at a harbor of refuge.  For we have explored the whole Bernese territory, both in Germany and Savoy, and found in each country one place especially, namely, Arau in Germany, or rather in Switzerland, and Vevay in Savoy, that was both able and willing to afford a comfortable home to the English exiles for the sake of religion.  And in these two towns we found the inhabitants favorable to us beyond all expectation.  But the people of Arau, by reason of their confined situation, are unable at present to supply and accommodate us with more than seven houses.  And the people of Vevay, though in a short time they will be able and willing to receive the whole twenty-five families, are yet a great way off, and difficult of access.  Wherefore we have judged it far better and more practicable, that some few persons here in this neighborhood, commencing with a small number, should gradually advance from small beginnings, and daily increase by fresh additions, than that all of them should contend at once with great expense, and labor, and peril, for the attainment of their object.  As many persons therefore as the seven houses which Arau supplies us with can contain, are now established there with their wives and children.  The remainder, wishing rather to join us here than to remove as far as Vevay, are lingering in other places, hoping and desiring an opportunity of coming hither.  And thus we English, driven from our country by popery, and from Wesel by Lutheranism, are now, most of us, by our mutual wishes, counsels, and assistance, tending to one spot, where it is still permitted us freely, sincerely, and openly to acknowledge and worship Christ.  And we shall all at length come together to such a place, if God see fit:  if otherwise, his will, and not ours, be done!  But certainly, whatever may happen to us in future, we shall all acknowledge ourselves exceedingly indebted to master Bullinger and yourself, by means of whose advice and commendatory letters I found and obtained for our countrymen from the people of Berne far more and better accommodation than I could have previously believed.  Wherefore I entreat you both to continue to assist me by your letters, counsels, and admonitions, that I may retain and improve the favor, kindness, and all other comforts necessary for the gathering together, and consolation, and edifying of those who, having quitted their country for the cause of Christ, are still looking out for a place where they may best be able to worship God in sincerity, and by mutual kind offices to supply each other with the necessary means of subsistence.  Salute, I pray you, in my name, with many thanks, masters Henry Bullinger, P. Martyr, B. Ochinus, and the other godly men; also master Parkhurst and his wife.  Farewell.
            Yours faithfully in Christ,
                  THOMAS LEVER.

LETTER LXXXVII. THOMAS LEVER AND OTHERS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Arau
Oct. 5, 1557
  Grace and peace in Christ Jesus.  While others are wont to dedicate their writings to princes and great men, with the view either to popularity or reward, you alone, most illustrious sir, have made choice of us poor exiles to whom to address your midnight studies and lucubrations, to commend us in your discourses, and to render our condition (miserable as regards this world, but glorious if we regard him to whom we have consecrated ourselves, namely, Christ crucified,) memorable to all posterity.  Your motives for having thus acted we can admire as well as account for.  For we are almost all of us unknown to you, and have no means of returning the obligation.  But herein appears your zeal for the Lord’s household, in that you not only diligently feed the flock over which the Lord has placed you, and instruct all other churches by your learned commentaries; but also this our exile, in which we are deserted by our friends, laughed to scorn by many, spurned by others, assailed by reproaches and revilings by the most, you alleviate by your learned discourses, that we may not sink under the pressure of these evils; and, like a good shepherd, you tend, strengthen, and cheer us all in our dispersion.  We accept therefore your princely gift, and embrace it with the feeling we ought; and in return send you what alone we can do, namely, our thanks, our affectionate regard, and a frequent mention of you our master in our prayers.  For your divine and honor-giving present, which no time shall ever bury in oblivion, receive this perishable paper filled with lasting thanks; and as often as we shall take your book into our hands, so often shall we seem to ourselves to hear you preaching, or rather the Lord himself revealing his mysteries to us by your ministry.
  Farewell, very dear father and much esteemed master in Christ, and always regard us poor exiles with the love you are wont to do:  for by your kindness is it that we this day experience, (nor are we alone in this feeling,) how true that is, which so many histories bear witness to, that the Swiss have been at all times remarkable for hospitality.  Continue therefore to edify the church of the Lord by your unwearied labors and studies, to commend us to your countrymen, and to let pass no opportunity of befriending the distressed.  May the Lord Jesus long preserve you for the good of his church!  Amen.  Arau.  Oct. 5, 1557
  The exiled congregation of the English at Arau, most devoted to you in the Lord, has commissioned the following persons to subscribe their names in the name of all the rest:
            THOMAS LEVER,
            RICHARD LANGHERN,
            ROBERT POWNALL,
            WALTER KELLY,
            JOHN PRETIE,
            THOMAS TURPIN,
            THOMAS ATTYN.

LETTER LXXXVIII. THOMAS SAMPSON TO JOHN CALVIN
Strasburgh
Feb. 23, 1555
  I do not cease from doing here, as I did at Lausanne, that is, I am expecting a reply from your kindness.  And indeed I am more anxiously expecting it, in proportion as I perceive the flame is lighted up with increased vehemence amongst us English.  For a strong controversy has arisen, while some desire the book of reformation of the church of England to be set aside altogether, others only deem some things in it objectionable, such as kneeling at the Lord’s supper, the linen surplice, and other matters of this kind; but the rest of it, namely, the prayers, scripture lessons, and the form of the administration of baptism and the Lord’s supper they wish to be retained.  Some contend for retaining the form, both because the archbishop of Canterbury defends the doctrine as sound, and also because the opposite party can assign no just reason why the form should be changed.  They exclaim on the other hand, that the sole object of these persons is the establishment of ceremonies.  You see, most excellent Calvin, how Satan is permitted both at home and abroad to rage against the English.  May God have compassion upon us! and I entreat you by Christ our common Savior, to give your best consideration to these disturbances of ours, and show me how we may best remedy this present evil.  I well know how much weight the authority of your letters will have with both parties in the settlement of this dispute.
  I have few things, and those far from pleasant, to tell you about the affairs of England.  On the dissolution of parliament the bishop of Winchester summoned before him all those who were in prison in London for the word of the Lord, in number eighty, and he urged them by promises, rewards, and threatenings, to sign their recantation.  All persevered most steadfastly, these two only excepted, Barlow, formerly bishop of Bath and Wells, and Cardmaker, archdeacon, I believe, of the same church:  for these submitted to him.  Five of them, after a few days, were again brought to trial, condemned as heretics, and, as we say, delivered up to the secular authority to be burned.  Whether the execution has taken place, I know not; but all the English are of opinion that they will most assuredly suffer.  Their names are Hooper, Rogers, Taylor, Bradford, Saunders; all of them formerly celebrated as ministers of the word.  The three bishops are still alive, and it is thought that a conference will be held between them and Pole.  Philip has not got possession of the crown.  The bishops are authorized to seize at pleasure upon all suspected of heresy.  You see, excellent sir, the state of England; I commend it to your prayers and those of your church.  Farewell, and write to me in return.  In haste.  Strasburgh, Feb. 23, 1555
        Yours,
          THOMAS SAMPSON.

LETTER LXXXIX. THOMAS SAMPSON TO HENRY BULLLINGER
Strasburgh
Aug. 6, 1555
  Greeting.  There are two motives which now induce me to write; one, that I may not be so neglectful of my duty, as, after having received from you so many friendly salutations in the letters of others, not to salute you, most learned sir, in return.  I both express and desire for you, and that from my heart, eternal blessings.  The other reason is, because I wished to make use of your name, under which I might transmit to master Chambers these letters and the parcel which I send along with them.  If I have taken too great a liberty in this respect, your courtesy towards the English has given me this license.  But I know that you will undertake this trouble with the same kindness that you are always wont to exhibit towards the English who are in exile for Christ’s sake.  Merciful indeed and faithful is our God, who, though we have left our natural parents, does not withdraw from us parental kindness.  I wish I could sometimes seriously bear this in mind, and both show myself not wholly ungrateful to God, and in some measure also grateful to yourself and those patrons who are like-minded with you.  And because, as I hope, my brethren at Zurich far excel me in this respect, so I am bold more freely to interest you in their affairs than in any private business of my own.  Farewell.  Master Martyr, who is in good health, salutes you.  You will hear the English news, which is but little, from master Chambers.  Once more farewell, my father and most revered master.  Strasburgh, Aug. 6, 1555
            Yours,
              THOMAS SAMPSON.

LETTER XC. THOMAS SAMPSON TO HENRY BULLINGER
Strasburgh
April 6, 1556
  I have received your letter, most reverend sir, in which you state that you have received a packet of letters from me.  I am glad that those letters were so faithfully delivered.  The kind messages which you sent to the English, I distributed, and especially to our bishop.  [Sir Richard] Morison was already dead.  Sir J. Cheke has left this place.  I have thus acquainted you with these things as my duty required.  Dr. Cranmer was burned at Oxford on the 21st of March.  A certain absurd recantation, forged by the papists, began to be spread abroad during his life-time, as if he had made that recantation: but the authors of it themselves recalled it while he was yet living, and he firmly and vehemently denied it.  The enemies of God are plotting dreadful and most cruel schemes against England.  May Almighty God turn away his anger from us!  Mary declares that her husband Philip shall be crowned in spite of every one.  She is so bold as to say this, even contrary to the advice of her council.  She is making great preparations both of money and arms.  You see whither these things tend; entreat therefore the Lord for us.
  As to what I had written in my last letter respecting the “Antichrist” of master Gualter, the matter now stands thus: while I was preparing to translate it into our language, I was informed that some other Englishman had not only undertaken the same task, but had also completed it.  I think therefore that it is now either in the press, or already printed.  Satan is here trying in many ways to disturb the peace of the churches; nor does he stir up only the turbulent Westphalians and those who are like them, but he is scattering his seed also among us exiles.  The French church at Frankfort is now suffering under this disease:  for there is a great contention between the pastor and some of his flock, if indeed they are true sheep.  Do you, excellent father, since these devices of Satan cannot escape your notice, oppose your prayers against his subtle attacks.  I wish we did this with the earnestness that the occasion demands.
  I ask but one thing more.  When I was at Zurich, it was permitted me (such was your singular kindness towards me) to hear and learn from you by conversation and conference those things in which I had need of advice and instruction.  You will do me the greatest kindness if you will allow me, since I am now absent, to experience the same favor by correspondence.  I promise you that I will not be too troublesome, neither will I expect from you such speedy replies, as not to be willing always to wait patiently for the immense pressure of your engagements.  I dare not however make the experiment before I have obtained your consent, lest I should be a hindrance to one who is so diligently laboring in the Lord’s vineyard.  May the Lord, whose servant you are, and in whose affairs you are engaged, preserve you long in life and health to his church!  In haste.  Strasburgh, April 6, 1556
              Yours,
                THOMAS SAMPSON.

LETTER XCI. THOMAS SAMPSON TO HENRY BULLINGER
unknown
unknown
  Greeting.  Although, most learned sir, you have no time to waste upon reading my trifles, yet since the letters which I have received from our brethren at Frankfort must be wrapped in paper, I should wish even the blank paper to salute you for me, as my duty requires.  Your sermon has long been circulated in English, and, as I am informed, is by no means unacceptable to the English.  The afflicted flock of Christ is still suffering the misery of persecution; for on the 27th of January there were seven burned at London, and on the same day five at Canterbury.  This is the power of darkness.  Heath, archbishop of York, obtains the office of chancellor; White of Lincoln is now made bishop of Winchester:  our languishing Penelope is waiting the return of her Ulysses, who is celebrating bacchanalian orgies at Antwerp on account of his happy attainment of the dukedom.  Uncertain tidings are reported about a truce between Philip and the king of France; but most disgusting accounts are given of their dancing, nightly buffooneries, and ravishing of virgins, to which things he has now entirely given himself up at Antwerp.  God will at length appear as an avenging judge; to him do you stretch forth your suppliant hands, even to weariness, as Moses did, on behalf of England.
  Farewell, most excellent father.  Salute, I pray you, that excellent man, and great patron of the English, master Gualter.  May Almighty God requite you all!  I am now employed upon his “Antichrist,” that the English may see an epitome of that book saluting the pope in English.  Again, farewell; live most happily in Christ.
              Yours, 
                THOMAS SAMPSON.
  Should master Gualter have any thing else, which, inserted in [my translation of] his work on antichrist, may be a means of improving it, he will do a service most acceptable to myself and profitable to the church, if he will please to send it me.  If not, I shall publish his Antichrist, by God’s blessing, just as it is, only a little abridged.  Now, for the third time, farewell.  In haste.

LETTER XCII. THOMAS SAMPSON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Lausanne
Aug. 12, 1556
  Greeting. The letter, most excellent Bullinger, that you gave me to be delivered to master Haller, has been of considerable service to me.  For when I came to Berne, and found none of my friends there, he arranged mattes for me most admirably, not only by entertaining me with the greatest hospitality as his guest, but most diligently procuring me a fellow-traveler to accompany me to Lausanne.  And all this he has done, because you had made mention of me in your letter to him.  I have therefore to express my thanks to you for having so kindly designed to commend me to so kind a friend; and I entreat you to convey to him my thanks for the courtesy he manifested towards me.  I acknowledge myself indeed most exceedingly obliged to you both.  May our great and good God long preserve you as an useful minister of his church!  Salute, I pray you, in my name, my most obliging host, master John James Wickius.  Farewell.  In haste.  Lausanne, Aug. 12, 1556
        Yours in Christ,
          THOMAS SAMPSON.

LETTER XCIII. THOMAS SAMPSON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Lausanne
Sept. 13, 1556
  I wrote to you, my excellent Bullinger, as soon as I had arrived at Lausanne, but am in doubt whether you ever received my letter; so that I think it well now to repeat what I had also written before, namely, that I am by no means unmindful of my duty towards you, and that I both know and acknowledge myself to be on many accounts much indebted to you.  This acknowledgement is due both to your kindness, and to that of Haller, afforded me for your sake.  Enroll me therefore, most reverend father, among the number of your friends. Oh! how much am I indebted to Almighty God, who has so provided for me the privilege of possessing such patrons, while my beloved England is in such miserable bondage.  I have received from doctor P. Martyr the following account of her servitude,--that Philip is now arrived in London, where he was received with the general applause of the people.  Thomas a Becket is publicly set up as a saint.  Inquiry is made after all those who refuse to go to mass.  Some Friars minor have arrived, and are residing at Winchester.  So far concerning public calamities.  Respecting those of individuals, he adds, that judge Hales threw himself into the river, and so was miserably drowned: such is the punishment of his apostasy.  But to return to England: you see how she is compelled to be in bondage to the Spaniards, the worst of all nations, pretended saints, most degraded children of anti-christ, and of the worst kind of idolatry.  But it is not only this bondage that is to be lamented, and to which we are involuntarily subject; but that also by which we are willing slaves to our impenitence.  This slavery it is that so miserably oppresses us; this it is that keeps us in bondage within the stone walls of our hearts, and compels us to be in slave-like subjection to most filthy swine; yea, it almost turns us into swine and dogs ourselves, and yet there is in us no desire of returning to our Father: and albeit this is the only way for our recovery, to obtain from our offended Father reconciliation for Christ’s sake, with tears; this only way we disregard, although we are desirous of being thought over careful in every thing else.  Hence proceeds apostasy, hence despondency, or desperate recklessness in impiety.
  I am complaining to you of these things, my excellent friend, that you may the more earnestly entreat God on our behalf, in proportion to our own neglect; and also, that I may be allowed more freely to beseech you, if you have leisure, to give some exhortation and advice to the English, (among whom your influence is very great,) by which they may be instructed how best to conduct themselves at this critical period.  If you will do this in Latin, there will be those who will translate your discourse into English.  Master Bucer, of pious memory, published a congratulatory epistle to the English, when England first received the gospel: and let Bullinger publish something now, by which the godly may be comforted, and the wicked admonished.  Should I seem too urgent in this request, I am ready to bear the charge of importunity, provided only you will confer this benefit upon our church.  I call it a benefit, because I am most fully persuaded that very many of our people will hence be led to a solid repentance.  And as soon as the Lord shall have found this to be the case among us, he will then show himself a compassionate Father, and will freely restore to us both the gospel and our country likewise; and how great a blessing this will be, any godly person may easily determine.  Come then, my excellent Bullinger, if your other engagements, so useful to the church, will allow you leisure, come, an direct your attention to what you consider will most profit our afflicted church.  May our eternal God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, evermore guide you by his Spirit into all truth!
        Your most devoted,
          THOMAS SAMPSON.
  Salute, I pray you, in my name, master Gualter, to whom also I commend the care of our church.  I know indeed that he has an exceeding regard for her:  may he always retain this, and earnestly entreat God on her behalf; and may he also stretch out his hand to her in her state of languishing!  Salute also master Wickius my host, and our English friends.  Give this letter, I pray you, to one of your boys, to take to my brother.  May the Lord Jesus bless you and all yours!  If you will do me the favor to reply, master Beza can always forward me your letters.
  Lausanne, Sept. 13, 1556

LETTER XCIV. THOMAS SAMPSON TO HENRY BULLINGER
Lausanne
Oct. 13, 1556
  Greeting.  Such is your favorable inclination towards England.  Most learned Bullinger, that I can easily persuade myself that your kindness will pay the same attention to what I requested of you in my intercessory letter, as if I had addressed you more fully and frequently upon the same subject.  I therefore commend to you my petition for my country England, the state of which is deserving of commiseration in proportion to its wretchedness.  Our affairs are indeed getting worse every day.  For I have just heard from England, that the earl of Sussex has been sent with some troops into Norfolk and Suffolk, to compel the gospellers to attend mass.  What tyranny is this!  Do you not think that the truly pious now stand in need of comfort, and the weak of exhortation?  Come then, if you have leisure, most excellent father, and address our friends by your letters.  Philip has demanded of the council to be inaugurated, that is, as we commonly say, to be crowned king of England; he has also required ten thousand English troops to be sent to serve under the emperor in the French war.  Both requests, however, were denied him.  From hence most deadly evils will arise to England, unless Almighty God of his great mercy shall avert them; which that he may do, do you earnestly implore him for Christ’s sake, and make some mention of me, if only at the end of your prayer.
          Yours,
            THOMAS SAMPSON.
  Lausanne, Oct. 13, 1556

LETTER XCV. THOMAS SAMPSON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
April 23, 1557
  I have received your letter, my learned friend, together with the sermon concerning the confession and denial of Christ our Lord.  But, as I was about the next day to go to Frankfort, I was neither able to answer your letter, nor to satisfy myself even up to this present time with respect to the object I had in view.  Having now returned, and obtained some leisure, I have no other answer to make, save to express my thanks for your kindness, and this not in my own name only, but in that of England.  For you have not only performed a most agreeable service to myself but a most useful one to England, unless we stand in the way of our own advantage.  I have already determined with myself to translate that sermon of yours into our vulgar tongue as soon as possible, and thus present it to the perusal of Englishmen.  That I did not undertake to have it printed in Latin, is owing partly to the terms of my request, in which I only pleaded for the English; and partly because I was unacquainted with your wishes on the subject.  I leave the Latin therefore to your discretion; respecting which, however, if I may be allowed to give an opinion, I should say that it is very necessary in this declining age.  However, I will execute as faithfully as I can what I have willingly taken upon myself.  England owes you thanks, and, I hope, will pay them.  May God of his mercy long preserve you in life and health to his church!  Believe me exceedingly attached to you; for I am yours,
                THOMAS SAMPSON.
  We all commend to your kindness our brethren, who will give you every information respecting our affairs.
  Strasburgh, Apr. 23, 1557

LETTER XCVI THOMAS SAMPSON TO PETER MARTYR.
Frankfort
April 8, 1558
  Much greeting.  Though I have had no letter from you since my reply respecting the Hebrew books, and though nothing has arisen since that time about which it was necessary to write to you; yet I have now thought it proper to address you, lest I should seem to be wanting in my duty.  For the friendship of such a man must not be buried in silence; and I feel it to be for my advantage to retain your friendship for me by all possible means.  I am writing therefore, in fact, from self-love; for my little writing-desk, so empty of all erudition and knowledge, desires to be replenished with the crumbs which fall from your table: on which account I have, God willing, decidedly resolved upon visiting you towards the end of May, and will then have some conversation with you respecting my intentions.  Meanwhile I must request (I dare not say, Peter Martyr to receive me into his house: this is denied me; yet I should be very glad if that sentence could any wise be recalled; but if not, I must request) Julius to look out a lodging for me.  I wish to have a bed-chamber to myself.  I do not intend staying there beyond three months at farthest.  Should Julius find any difficulty in meeting with such a lodging, let him call upon master White in my name, who was my landlord when I was there last; and if he can procure a separate bed-chamber at his house, I will willingly engage it, if I can obtain one no where else.  I requested also our friend Jewel to receive a parcel from the bearer of this letter, and take charge of it till I come.  You see what trouble I am giving both to you and yours by my proposed visit; but you always pardon my importunity, and therefore I treat you with greater freedom.  I will only add, that, should it be convenient, I shall be glad to hear respecting the receipt of the parcel, and also what is done about the lodging; and this before the middle of May, namely, before I leave Strasburgh.  I have requested Julius to write; do you also charge him to do so.
  We have no news from England, except that the queen is wholly occupied in raising money and troops, it may be, possibly, to make war against herself.  However this be, a war is threatened.  You have, I suppose, heard of the extinction of the most splendid of all the masses throughout Europe.  I was present at its funeral, and saw the emperor crowned without the mass.  I have here met with Beza, who obtained from the princes, while they were here, a letter to the French king for the liberation of the prisoners of Christ.  What has been done by us besides, I will tell you when we meet.  Salute your friend Julius, and all your friends in my name.  In haste.  Frankfort, Apr. 8, 1558
        Yours,
          THOMAS SAMPSON.
  Peter Perne has my things, and will send them to you; I will pay the carriage when I come.

LETTER XCVII. THOMAS SAMPSON TO PETER MARTYR.
Strasburgh
July 10, 1558
  By the blessing of God I have returned in safety to Strasburgh, and find all my friends well; and I am glad to hear that you are well also.  I venerate and embrace that holy and inviolable friendship, which you promise me in the cause of Christ.  Besides, I regard with the greatest delight this most useful kind of study, though I am now, through the fault of certain individuals, compelled to put off till another time that which, for the sake of my studies, I had intended to accomplish immediately after the fair: and that is my journey to you; at the thought of which, as I often turned it over in my mind, and rejoiced exceedingly, so I am now obliged, not without much regret, both to witness and to desire its postponement.  I shall come however, I hope, shortly: in the mean time, I entreat you for Christ’s sake, let there exist between us that inviolable friendship which you promise; let there always be in you the same mind, the same desire of assisting me in my little studies, and, aided by the divine blessing, I will not neglect the opportunity afforded me.  But I will give you notice of my coming.  Your promise about the Hebrew books is most gratifying; and I beg that you will act altogether in this matter just as if it wee your own concern, and you shall neither find me dissatisfied nor ungrateful.  When you have agreed with Perne or others, whom you may think qualified for this business, about the means of obtaining the books, and will let me know, I will send you the money, together with a list of the books that I wish to purchase.  I only add, what you do, do quickly.  Master Heton and his wife salute you.  He hopes to visit you at Zurich before the end of September.  Master Chambers salutes you.  All our friends are well.  My wife and our Joanna salute you.  The people of Frankfort (I mean the English there) are in a perpetual motion, more perverse than useful.  Philip is still in England.  Almost all are making preparation for a war with England.  But your country-men on their return from the fair will be full of news; so I will make an end of writing.  Farewell, and live most happy in Christ.  Affectionately salute for me master Bullinger.  Strasburgh, July 10, 1558
        Your most devoted,
            THOMAS SAMPSON.

LETTER XCVIII. CHRISTOPHER HALES TO RODOLPH GUALTER.
London
March 4, 1550
  Although I promised, most learned Gualter, to write to you from Antwerp, and tell you all the occurrences of so long a journey; yet, to tell the truth, I was so fatigued with riding, that scarce any part of my body, much less my hand, could perform its office.  But now, lest I should seem altogether forgetful of our friendship and mutual promise of correspondence, I write at length, not, as I had intended, from Antwerp, but from London, where I arrived from Calais with greater difficulty and danger than I had met with through the whole of my previous journey.  For thus far I had brought all my property in safety, with the exception of a dog, which in the open plain of Brabant, on this side Bruges, refused to follow me any farther: but on our passage over we fell in with a French pirate, (for the truce of fifteen days was on land only, and did not extend to the sea,) by whom our vessel was very near being captured.  And had not the tide, as God so will it, failed the privateer which was in pursuit of us, we should without doubt every one of us have been taken prisoners.  But the matter did not end thus.  For after we had waited on the shore seven hours in expectation of the flow of the tide, we did not get off without the greatest danger, and some damage to our property.  We were compelled, unless we preferred learning French, to run our vessel on shore, sailing and rowing as expeditiously as we could; in which flight the sailors, as usual in the greatest extremity, that they might more quickly reach the shore, threw overboard whatever first came to hand, without any regard to its value.  Among these was my trunk, in which, as you know, were contained my books, and the letters of my excellent friends.  I care very little about the destruction of my own property; but the loss of the letters of those worthy men, to whose kindness I am so deeply indebted, grieves me most exceedingly.  But I hope, when they know of my escape, (such is their friendliness and good-will towards me,) that they will not so much regret the loss of their letters, and feel angry with me, as praise the Lord with me, who has delivered me from such great and imminent danger.
  Thus much then of myself; I now come to other matters.  Throughout my whole journey I could have no suspicion whatever of the emperor being at war, as all things were as quiet as possible; but when I reached home, I heard that a large fleet was in preparation by him, though what he is intending, or in what direction, I have no certain information.  This only I know, and I am very glad of it, that no injury can be done you by sea.  I found all my friends and property safe and well at home, to my great pleasure and delight.  The facts were true which I had related to you concerning my brother; but God, the just judge, and best defender of innocence, delivered him from prison almost at the very time I left you.
  Hooper is daily setting forth with all boldness the heavenly doctrine of our heavenly Father: he is tomorrow to preach before the king.  The bishop of Rochester, by name Ridley, a worthy minister of Christ, succeeds the bishop of London, who is deprived.  Another post is allotted to the bishop of Westminster, where he will do less mischief.  Salute in my name all the brethren in the Lord, and especially that excellent soldier of Christ, and chief minister of your church, master Bullinger, to whom, I pray, make my excuses for having lost his annotations; and request him at the same time to procure me another copy, when I will satisfy the copyist for his trouble.  Salute the reverend presbyter, master Pellican, Theodore [Bibliander] learned in the Lord, Otto, Zuinglius, Wolfius, and the witty Frisius, with all the rest; as also each of my fellow-countrymen, whose letters I have lost, which you will mention to them, that they may write them over again.  Salute your very dear wife in my name, to whom I would have now sent a small present, if I had any means of forwarding it.  When an opportunity is afforded me, I will certainly send it.  Meanwhile, I request you, my dear Rodolph, to procure your Apelles to paint for me the following portraits, those namely of Zuinglius, Pellican, Theodore, master Bullinger, and yourself, holding books in their hands; of the same size as that oval one of yours which you showed me, and on wood, not canvas; and I request you to see that four verses, the subject of which I leave to your discretion, be written underneath.  Make an agreement with the painter that the colors be good and carefully set off, even though the expense be increased.  When finished, let them be packed up in a wooden box, and sent to Burcher, who will pay for them.  The sooner they are done, the more acceptable will they be.  And if you think the artist can paint a good likeness of Œcolampadius, I would have it in addition to the other five.  Do not take it ill of me, my worthy host, that I impose upon you this trouble: for did I not love you, and think myself loved by you, I should not do so.  If life be granted me, you shall not find me an ungrateful guest.  Take care that you be well in the Lord.  Send an answer, I pray you, as soon as possible, but take care that the painter put his hand to the work as speedily as he can.  I leave the whole matter to your fidelity and discretion.  London, March 4
            Your most attached,
                CHRISTOPHER HALES.

LETTER XCIX CHRISTOPHER HALES TO RODOLPH GUALTER.
London
May 24, 1550
  I have received your letter, my excellent Rodolph, by which I learn with very great regret how little honor there is among men, and how few persons there are in whom any confidence can be placed.  But I hope that such is the courtesy of your senate, united with the greatest discretion, that they will endeavor to arrange this whole business, whatever it be, to the glory of God’s great name; and I have no doubt but that the Author of peace will grant them a happy issue.  Let us diligently pray in the mean time that he may be pleased to do this as soon as possible.  For godliness has no voice in the midst of arms, the truth of which saying we, alas! as you well know, have lately experienced in our grievous intestine discords.  And I could wish that others, being warned by our example, would lay aside their arms, and learn to lead a peaceable life in all godliness, a thing we have but lately begun to understand.  But now at length, thank God, we are in the enjoyment of great tranquility: may our good and gracious God grant that we may employ it to his honor, and the benefit of our neighbors!  John a Lasco came back to us ten days since, in consequence of things in Poland not turning out according to his godly desires.  His king would not grant him an audience, for fear of the bishops.  As soon as I have heard from him how your friend Florian is going on, I will let you know in my next letter.  Hooper was made bishop of Gloucester two days since, but under godly conditions: for he will not allow himself to be called Rabbi, or my lord, as we are wont to say; he refuses to receive the tonsure, he refuses to become a pie, and to be consecrated and anointed in the usual way, with many other things, which you shall hear at another time: from this bishoprick he has two thousand crowns per annum.  God grant that he may so preside over his flock as to afford a godly example to the other shepherds; and I would desire you, my Rodolph, and the other learned ministers of that church to labor earnestly in his behalf.  Your friend Oglethorpe, as I hear, is imprisoned for superstition, and is about to lose, it is said, the presidency of Magdalene college.  The new bishop of London is now employed in his visitation, and threatens to eject those who shall not have come to their senses before his next visitation; and if I know the man, he will be as good as his word.
  I wrote to you in my last letter about some portraits; and I now repeat my request, that you will be mindful of me in this matter.  Salute in my name your excellent wife Rachel, to whom I send two candlesticks, and twenty dishes, some of them of pewter, and some of wood.  I wish indeed that they had all been silver; for the kindness of you both has deserved that from me and a great deal more.  Salute moreover in my name all the ministers of your church, and especially masters Bullinger, Pellican, Theodore [Bibliander], Otto, Wolfius, and Zuingllius, my friend Butler too, and John, if he is over yonder, and your merry friend Frisius, and all the rest.  Farewell, master Rodolph, and command my services.  London, May 24, 1550
          Your friend and brother in Christ,
              CHRISTOPHER HALES.

LETTER C. CHRISTOPHER HALES TO HENRY BULLILNGER.
London
June 12, 1550
  I was exceedingly rejoiced, my most excellent Bullinger, at hearing from our worthy friend Abel, that you were alive and well: but when he delivered me your letter, I then knew for a certainty that this was the case; and that you have not yet laid aside from your remembrance our friendship contracted in the intercourse of a few months, which circumstance I am inclined to attribute to your singular kindness.  But I wish that an opportunity may sometime be afforded me of being serviceable in any way either to yourself or any of your friends.  I would certainly take care that mutual fidelity, faith, and good-will, should nowise be wanting in myself.  As to the pictures, I will endeavor that no offense be occasioned by that matter.  And not only in this, but also in everything else, I will defend, as far as lies in my power, the fame and reputation of you all; which I know to be entirely pure from any of those things which can in any way impair the glory and praise of God.  I think that my elder brother, John Hales, who was the cause of my quick and sudden departure from you, will come over to you this summer from Augsburg.  Should he wish to make use of your most prudent counsel in any matter, let him perceive that my recommendation has been of some use towards the attainment of that object.  And any kindness you may show to him will be much more gratifying and acceptable to me than if you had shown it to myself: which though it may appear to you a bold assertion, yet such is my love towards him, that when I have said every thing, I seem to myself to have said but little.  Farewell, most excellent sir, and believe that I am yours.  Salute in my name all the most worthy ministers of your church and school, to whom I wish every happiness in the Lord.  Farewell.  London, June 12
          Yours heartily,
            CHRISTOPHER HALES.

LETTER CI. CHRISTOPHER HALES TO HENRY BULLINGER
London
Dec. 10, 1550
  Much health, most excellent sir.  Your letter has been brought to me, wherein I perceive the candor of your mind, and your more than common kindness towards me.  Your candor appears, in that you have borne the loss I occasioned you with so much courtesy and good temper: although I was entirely free from blame, since it arose not from any fault of mine, but from, I know not whether to call it, the willfulness or bad faith of the sailors.  But however it be, you have afforded me no common pleasure by so kindly interpreting the whole matter.  Your exceeding kindness appears in this, that you have both sympathized in my misfortune, and so courteously congratulated me on the favorable state of my affairs.  What you say, that I have you in my remembrance, is indeed true; and not one year only, nor all the years of my future life, will be able to efface that remembrance; as you shall certainly find to be the case, as soon as I shall meet with any opportunity of showing it.
  I have delayed to write respecting the study of medicine at Oxford, and the expenses there, until I could give you a correct statement.  I have however learned from a friend, who is resident there, that the university of Oxford is not to be compared with that of Paris or the schools of Italy; but still it is one in which a studious youth may be occupied with great advantage.  The same is to be said of Cambridge, but I rather recommend Oxford on account of the greater salubrity of the air.  Cambridge, by reason of the neighboring fen, is much exposed to fever, as I have experienced more frequently than I could wish.  With respect to expense, my friend informed me, that thirty French crowns would suffice tolerably well for a year; to which if other ten could be added, a man might expect to live very comfortably.  In my time, ten years since, twenty crowns were a sufficient allowance; but in these latter days, when avarice is every where increasing, and charity growing cold, and this by a divine scourge, every thing has become almost twice as dear as it was.  And this I attribute to no other cause than our proud and Pharaoh-like rejection of the spiritual food of our souls so liberally and abundantly offered.  May God have mercy on us, and give us better minds, that we may at length truly and heartily repent; lest, abusing the singular mercy of God, we should call down upon ourselves a more grievous retribution!
  I have written to master Gualter to procure six portraits to be painted for me, which he writes word that he has done, but has retained four of them for two reasons; first, because there is some danger lest a door shall hereafter be opened to idolatry; and next, lest it should be imputed to you as a fault, as though it were done by you from a desire of empty glory.  But the case is far otherwise.  For I desired to have them on this account, both for an ornament to my library, and that your effigies might be beheld in the picture, as in a mirror, by those who by reason of distance are prevented from beholding you in person.  This is not done, excellent sir, with the view of making idols of you; they are desired for the reasons I have mentioned, and not for the sake of honor or veneration.  For except myself, who always desire your reputation and honor in all respects unimpaired, there is no one who knows for what reason these pictures are coming to me.  I request therefore, most excellent sir, that I may be allowed to obtain from you this favor.  Do not, I pray you, show yourself obdurate in this matter, which is both trifling in itself, and not capable of occasioning injury to any one.  Farewell, most accomplished sir.  London, Dec. 10, 1550
        Your most devoted,
            CHRISTOPHER HALES.

LETTER CII. CHRISTOPHER HALES TO RODOLPH GUALTER
London
June 12, 1550 - Jan. 26, 1551
  Much health, my excellent Rodolph.  I have received two letters from you, by which I clearly understand your affection for me, and that the commission which I too freely imposed upon you, has been executed by you with the greatest fidelity and diligence.  And this I do not so much gather from the result itself, as from the favorable disposition of your mind towards me.  I know that every thing was most diligently undertaken by you, and rather choose to lay the blame upon my own fate than to entertain the slightest suspicion of any fault on your part; so that there was no occasion for making me an apology.  You have indeed admirably discharged your office, and I certainly consider myself undeserving of so much kindness.  You must not therefore suppose that I view the matter in any other light than if the whole affair had succeeded according to my wish.  I am greatly surprised that Burcher should persist in thinking that portraits can nowise be painted with a safe conscience and a due regard to godliness; since there is not a single n the holy scriptures which appears really to sanction that opinion.  For, if I understand aright, images were forbidden in the sacred books for no other reason, than that the people of God might not be drawn aside from the true worship of one true God to the vain worship of many false gods.  And if there be no danger of this, I do not see why pictures may not be painted and possessed, especially when they are not kept in any place where there can be the least suspicion of idolatry.  Who worships the monkey that is placed in your fish-market?  Who worships a cock fixed on the church-steeple, as your father-in-law actually has, who is so determined an enemy of idolatry?  Who bows himself before your Charles placed on the top of the tower?  Who is so senseless, as to worship a painting or picture deposited in the library?  Supposing that there are those who honor them when hung up in churches and sacred places, which I by no means approve; yet where is the man so devoid of all religion, godliness, fear of the most high and Almighty God, and so entirely forgetful of himself, as to regard with veneration a little portrait reposited in some ordinary place in a museum?
  But it is said that times may occur, when there will be danger lest encouragement be given to idolatry by their means.  Well then, it may in the same manner be argued, that no image or likeness ought to be made of any thing whatever!  But I am so far from suspecting you of an opinion of this kind, that I do not suppose it is entertained by any man upon earth.  Indeed, my worthy friend, if I thought it possible that the worship of idols could be re-established by such means, believe me, that if I had the pictures, I would tear them into a thousand pieces with my own hands.
  Another reason is next alleged, which if I had considered a true one, I certainly, my Rodolph, should never have made this request.  I know your disposition, and that of the rest of you.  It is impossible that you should ever suppose me capable of thinking so unfavorably of yourself and of the other ministers of your church, whom I consider to be as far removed from all anxiety for display as any persons living.  But you have no occasion to fear what others may think of you, as there is no one, or at least very few, with the exception of our two selves, who know from what source these pictures will be brought to me.  Who lays it to the charge of the Romans of old, that we have their resemblances engraved upon numerous medals?  Who blames Luther, Bucer, Philip [Melancthon], Œcolampadius, and very many others now living, because their likenesses are every where to be met with?  This is nothing extraordinary, but a thing of very frequent occurrence among all nations, for men fond of learning to adorn their studies with the memorials and images of literary characters; and this I think no one would say is done with a view to the establishment of idolatry.  These things are done in general for the sake of ornament, not to do honor to individuals; so that you need not imagine that you will ever become the instruments of some impious and ungodly purpose.
  As to your telling me that each of you has retained his own portrait for himself, I have no right to find fault, since you seem to have done this under the excitement of godly zeal.  I know that you are prudent and well-judging men, and that you have not rashly changed your purpose, which I certainly wish you had not done without being influenced and supported by grave reasons; and if they had known me well, they would not have thought they had any thing to fear from such a circumstance.  For I am not one who would have the true worship of God adulterated in any, even the least, matter; much less would I wish the reintroduction of gross idolatry, so hateful to the Lord of heaven and earth.
  Wherefore I request you, my beloved brother in Christ, to explain to them these my sentiments on this subject, and to ask, in my name, permission for me to obtain from their kindness this single request, namely, that the remaining four portraits may be sent me.  And if you cannot obtain this, (though I hope otherwise,) I at least beg and indeed insist upon this, that your Zeuxis shall be paid at my expense.  For I by no means consider it fair, that those worthy men should pay the penalty of my offence, if offence it be:  I have been in fault, and I must bear the blame.  In the next place, I entreat you, my worthy friend, that should I not be able to obtain all the portraits, I may at least obtain the two others, namely, that of Theodore, which you tell me was taken without his knowledge, and as it were by stealth, and also your own; for I am well assured that you are of quite the contrary opinion, unless you have lately very much changed it, or else you would never have had the portraits taken of your wife and little girl.  I am now dealing with you upon what you have set your own seal to, as they say; see what reply you have to make.  But I know that not only yourself, but that the most excellent master Bullinger is of the same way of thinking, and this too from your own statement.  For you tell me that the portrait of Œcolampadius is taken from the copy which he has in his possession; which if he had considered to be unlawful, I am sure that a man of so much piety and godliness would never have allowed so impious an act.  But enough of this.  Excuse me if I have dwelt somewhat too long upon the subject.
  And now respecting the expenses and studies at Oxford; I have been more diligent in my inquiry, because the youth was a connexion of yours, and the son of that excellent man, the senator Cellarius.  You must know then, that I have ascertained from an Oxford friend, who has himself tried it, that medicine is so studied there, as that a man may devote himself to literature with great advantage.  In the next place, that the expense of living is such, as that thirty crowns a year will be amply sufficient; but if ten more be added, there will be no deficiency of means for every proper purpose.  And if I may interpose my opinion, I would rather that such allowance should be provided, as that there should be ten pounds too much, rather than one too little.  Should he come hither, I shall most willingly show him every kindness for your sake.  Lastly, with respect to the pewter and the cloth, I cannot send them at present, but, God willing, you shall certainly receive them at the next Frankfort fair.  Christopher Froschover is now at Oxford; I have received a letter from him, but have not yet chanced to see him.  Your Zurich courtesy will not allow me to refuse any service that he may require.  I hear that your wife is in the family-way; wish her from me a happy delivery.  Take care of your health, Rodolph, my very dear brother in the Lord.  Salute from me all our godly brethren sojourning among you.  Though Butler is named last, let him know that he has not the last place in my friendship.  Salute him therefore, and his wife, when you have an opportunity.  Although the church of God be oppressed, it cannot be destroyed.  Our godly bishops are planning, for the second time, a more complete reformation of our church.  God grant that all things may turn out to the glory of his name!  Amen, Amen.  Farewell, my beloved Rodolph.
              Yours heartily,
                       C.   HALES.

LETTER CIII. CHRISTOPHER HALES TO RODOLPH GUALTER.
London
Jan. 26, 1551
  Much health, most excellent Rodolph.  You desired me, in your last letter, to send you some of the pewter ware of this country, and some cloth suited for hose.  This commission I have executed as faithfully and diligently as I could, and I hope that it will meet your approval.  I have delivered the articles to our friend Richard Hilles, who has promised to take care that they shall e handed over to Froschover at Frankfort at the next fair.  And that you may know more certainly what you are to receive from him, you must know that I have enclosed in the package six dishes of a larger size, and as many smaller, to which I have added six saucers.  There are also twelve plates, which, if I am not mistaken, are of the kind you wished for.  They cost six and twenty shillings and seven pence of our money: if this price appear to you too great, I assure you, that not only ware of this kind, but also every thing else, is twice as dear as usual.  As to the cloth, I purchased it for seven shillings of our money, which, at the present rate of exchange, amounts to one French crown and two batzen.  As you gave me no positive direction in your letter, I have sent as much cloth as will make one pair of hose.  Should I understand that this expensive kind of cloth meets your approbation, I can easily contrive for you to have at any time as much as you may require.
  And now as to the picture and the labor of the artist.  I must again entreat and implore you that, if it be possible, you will let me have them.  But if I cannot obtain this, at least let the work of the artist be paid for at my expense.  For I do not think it right for me to impose such a burden upon those excellent men.  Farewell, my worthy Rodolph, and number me among your friends.  Salute in my name all the worthy ministers of your church, together with your excellent wife and our friend Butler.  Entreat the Lord continually for us in your prayers; for his church was never placed in greater danger.  The affair of the bishop of Winchester is now going on, and he will probably ere long be deprived of his office, together with some other not godly bishops.  May Christ grant, (for the whole cause is his,) that other godly men may be appointed in their stead!  London, Jan. 26, 1551
          Yours heartily,
            CHRISTOPHER HALES.
  The whole cost of the pewter and cloth together amounts to five French crowns and one or two batzen.

LETTER CIV. RICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
unknown
August, 1540
  Patience, that when you have performed the work of God, you may obtain the promise!  God knows, my most honored master, how greatly I have always desired to write to you, and how slenderly I am furnished with materials for writing in Latin.  He who deals to every man the measure of faith, and gifts according to his will, has bestowed upon me some little knowledge of Latin, but not the ability of expressing myself at all clearly in that language, so that I have never yet ventured to write in Latin to any one.  But as you have so often challenged me with your hortatory and truly comforting letters, and, so to speak, have compelled me to write you something in reply; and especially as I am persuaded that with your wonted courtesy and kindness you will take every thing in good part that will anywise admit of a right interpretation; I have now sent you this ill-composed letter, which however I certainly should not have sent at present, had I not previously lost all hope of seeing you this year.  I certainly intended to have gone into Switzerland with my wife this present August, chiefly for the sake of paying you a visit; but my brother Butler, who is now busily engaged in courting a widow of Strasburgh, has been away with her relatives the whole of this month; so that unless we choose to travel by ourselves, we are at present obliged to remain here, though I do not expect to have so much leisure time again for a whole year.  Do not, I pray you, mention this to any one; but he is at present uncertain whether she will marry any body, and I am afraid she will hardly become his wife, by reason of a disorder under which she has long been suffering, even during her late husband’s lifetime.  It has often come into my mind to write you the news from England, and the changes that are continually taking place; but I have been prevented by a becoming modesty from persevering in my intention; for I not only write Latin as barbarously and ungrammatically as I speak it, but even the words themselves fail me.  Relying, however, upon your wisdom and good nature, by which you know how to be unlearned among the unlearned, that you may unite them to Christ, I send you herewith a summary of those matters respecting the state of our kingdom last year, which I have gathered from the letters of brethren worthy of credit, and which I had intended to communicate to you in person.  I only request you to receive in good part what has been written, though in a rude and barbarous style, with a friendly disposition towards you.
  As to the state of our commonwealth before the feast of Easter last passed (namely in the year 1540), I hope you have been sufficiently informed by our aforesaid brother Butler.  For in my letters to him I described very carefully, as far as my abilities would allow me, all the events that had occurred, and this that he might afterwards communicate them to the learned and godly men yonder, and especially to yourself.  I received your letter dated on the sixth of this month, and also the one you had previously forwarded by that Frenchman, at the same time, and heartily thank you for them both; and especially because you thought fit therein to afford me such true and godly consolation from the holy scriptures, and so diligently to exhort me to patience and longsuffering, in which graces I am greatly deficient.  In the next place I have received from your letter, by God’s blessing, this great benefit, namely, that I have considered and deliberated much more carefully and discreetly than before, what it is to leave one’s first love, and how unbecoming it is for a Christian to return to his vomit; and how fearful a thing it is for any one to fall into the hands of the living God!  Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, who has doubtless oftentimes comforted you in your tribulation and distress, that you may thereby be more able to comfort them which are in any trouble!
  Meanwhile however, that you may know the state of my affairs, it is as follows.  When I perceived that there was no place left for me in England, unless, as Ustazades replied to the king of Persia, I chose to become a traitor both to God and man; I forthwith left the country, but on the pretext of carrying on my trade in this place.  This motive however is known by all my godly acquaintance to be a false one, and also suspected to be such by my ungodly adversaries.  But as I have not been indicted for heresy, or summoned before the courts of law, all my property yonder is at present tolerably safe; so that I remit to England at every fair, for the purpose of importing a fresh supply of cloth, the money that I receive both here and at Frankfort.  I have mentioned this with the view of making you acquainted with my affairs, lest, in case you should hear any report of my voluntary exile in these parts, the account of my troubles in England should fail of being noticed.  Meanwhile, I freely confess to you, (though it would not be safe for me to make the same acknowledgment to every one,) that I have determined not to return thither, unless it should first please God to effect such a change, as that we may serve him there without hinderance, and without being forced to sanction what is evil.  My wife, thank God, makes provision for our comfort here quite as well, or indeed better than myself.  Although, by God’s help, I do not doubt of my perseverance even unto the end, I entreat you to pray the Lord for us, that he which has begun a good work in us may perform it until the day of Christ.  Our brother Butler returned to England after the last Frankfort fair; but so miserable was the state of things in that country, that he did not remain there more than eighteen days.
  Furthermore, I entreat you for God’s sake not to mention to any one what I am now writing, except to masters Theodore Bibliander, Pellican, Leo Judæ, and other godly and learned men of the same stamp; and above all, let it not be known as coming from any Englishman.  And I implore you not to let them read my letter, for fear they should ridicule, as it deserves, my rash and foolish presumption in writing in this unpolished and unconnected manner.  I should have given my letter to Butler, if he had been at home, or to some other Englishman in this place, to be put into better Latin, only that I am not willing for them to know (though I do not distrust them) that I have communicated so  many things to all of you together; lest probably, when they are writing to England, they may, with a good intention, acquaint some godly person or other, who, without sufficient caution, as frequently happens, will . . . . . .
  I thank you much for the information you give me respecting Falckner; and I request that if there are any other pious and God-fearing men yonder, who are in the habit of purchasing English cloth, you will let me know their names, that, should they at any time wish to obtain some cloth from me upon credit, I may let them have it.  For I do not feel disposed to credit any persons with any large sum, except the people of Zurich, and a few, it may be, at Schaffhausen: wherefore, if you will do me this favor, I shall be much obliged.  I will pray Christ to requite you in return, for whose sake I know that you love me; just as you hate the ungodly for the devil’s sake, and for his image in them, as did the prophet David, and all holy men besides.  How well do we learn by daily experience the truth of that verse of Solomon, The righteous abhor the wicked, and those who are in the right way are abominable to the ungodly.  Farewell, honored pastor, most happily in the Lord, and may Christ, the chief Shepherd, grant you so to fulfill your ministry, that when he shall appear, you may not be ashamed, but have confidence, and obtain the incorruptible crown of glory promised to those who are like you.  Amen.  My wife dutifully salutes you, and especially your wife.  We both of us very much desire to visit you.  You have no need to wish for us, for we cannot in any way be of comfort or service to you, but in many ways a hinderance and impediment to your studies.  Again farewell in Christ, my very dear master, and do not, I pray you, forget to salute in my name your godly wife, and joint heir with yourself of the kingdom of heaven.
          Yours heartily,
            R. H.

LETTER CV.RICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
1541
  Before Whitsuntide three persons were burned in the suburbs of London, in that part of the city belonging to the diocese of Winchester, because they denied transubstantiation, and had not received the sacrament at Easter.  And as thee things took place in the diocese of Winchester, it was remarked by many persons that these men were brought to the stake by the procurement of the bishop; just as he burned, shortly after, a crazed man of the name of Collins.  This man had previously been kept in prison for two or three years, but I do not exactly know for what reason.  Once, as he was passing by a crucifix, to which processions had sometimes been made, (principally by the Spanish sailors on their arriving safe in harbor,) he aimed an arrow at the idol, and striking its foot, called out to it to defend itself, and punish him if it were able.  Many persons, however, say that this was not the cause of his imprisonment; but rather, because he was wont to exclaim against the nobility and great men of the kingdom, and rashly to bring forward against them many passages of holy scripture, especially the prophets, wherein there was any mention made of unrighteous judgments, or the cruel treatment of neighbors and dependents.  Meanwhile, I know this for a fact, that when Lambert was confined with him in the same prison, (that Lambert, namely, who was condemned by the king himself for his opinions respecting the eucharist, a short time before Burcher fled from England,) four or five days before he was brought to the stake, this Collins was not so crazy or ignorant but that he was able to bring forward and apply very expeditiously and aptly on Lambert’s behalf, against the bishops and other ungodly persons who appeared against him before the royal tribunal, various passages from the New Testament, and from the Psalms, such as these, “Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake, &c.”  “The Lord knoweth the days of the upright, and their inheritance shall be for ever.” [Ps. xxxvii. 18]  “The wicked shall not dwell with thee, neither shall the unrighteous stand in thy sight.”  “Thou hatest all workers of iniquity, thou shalt destroy all that speak leasing.” [Ps. v. 5, &c. vulgate.]  “The Lord abhorreth the bloody and deceitful man; they shall not live out half their days,” &c. [Ps. lv. 23]  Now to other matters.
  Before the feast of John the Baptist it began to be whispered about that the king intended to divorce his queen, Anne, the sister of the duke of Gelderland, though he had married her publicly with great pomp, in the face of the church, on the feast of Epiphany, after last Christmas.  This was first of all whispered by the courtiers, who observed the king to be much taken with another young lady of very diminutive stature, whom he now has.  It is a certain fact, that about the same time many citizens of London saw the king very frequently in the day-time, and sometimes at midnight, pass over to her on the river Thames in a little boat.  The bishop of Winchester also very often provided feastings and entertainments for them in his palace; but the citizens regarded all this not as a sign of divorcing the queen, but of adultery.  After a few days, Cromwell, the king’s vicegerent in causes ecclesiastical (for such was his official designation) fell from the king’s favor, and at the beginning of June was sent to the Tower of London, from whence he never went forth till the twenty-eighth of July, when he was beheaded, together with another nobleman, the lord Hungerford, whom they charged with having attempted to calculate the day when the king should die.  I know nothing for certain as to the cause of Cromwell’s execution, because he was not brought for examination before the tribunal, as had always been the case heretofore with all noblemen, and especially when accused of treason against the king.  But it was commonly said by most persons, and with great probability, that the real cause of his execution was, that he did not support the king, as Winchester and the other courtiers did, in his project of a divorce, but rather asserted that it would neither be for the king’s honor, nor for the good of the kingdom.  Not long before the death of Cromwell, the king advanced him, and granted him large houses and riches, and more public offices, together with very extensive and lucrative domains; (and in the same way he also endowed queen Anne, a short time before he beheaded her.)  But some persons now suspect that this was all an artifice, to make people conclude that he must have been a most wicked traitor, and guilty of treason in every possible way; or else the king would never have executed one who was so dear to him, as was made manifest by the resents he had bestowed upon him.  It was from a like artifice, as some think, that the king conferred upon Cromwell’s son Gregory, who was almost a fool, his father’s title, and many of his domains, while he was yet living in prison; that he might more readily confess his offences against the king, at the time of execution, and that his majesty might not be provoked to take back the presents and estates that he had bestowed.  There are, moreover, other parties who assert, with what truth God knows, that Cromwell was threatened to be burned at the stake, and not to die by the axe, unless at the time of execution he would acknowledge his crimes against the king; and that he then said, “I am altogether a miserable sinner.  I have sinned against my good and gracious God, and have offended the king.”  But what he said respecting the king was carelessly and coldly pronounced by him.
  Our sins have doubtless deserved this change in our affairs, because, when God sent forth his word amongst us, it was not regarded by us as the word of God, nor were we sufficiently thankful to its author; but we have been dreaming that it was understood by our own strength and ability, and have constantly ascribed its success to the conduct of some, and the learning of others, while we fancied that God was all the while asleep and inactive.  Wherefore the Lord, purposing gradually, but not all at once, to manifest his mercy towards us, as well as his power in the general course of his providence, has taken away, together with purity of doctrine, those individuals also upon whose wisdom we so much depended for support; willing that his providence should herein be shown forth, by frustrating and destroying our expectations from men, and our boasting that interfered with his glory; and manifesting too his mercy, by permitting these things to be gradually taken away, together with those persons in whom we trusted; and this, that, being so often deceived in our expectations from the creature, we might place all our confidence in him alone, and acknowledge him as the continual agent, as well as the original source, of all grace and goodness.  This long-suffering of God, so tempered with instruction, ought to have worked repentance in us, unless we had been a stiff-necked people.  But such was the wretchedness of our condition, that we did not consider it was the Lord’s teaching: but as soon as he had destroyed the hopes we had reposed in one individual, we raised up to ourselves another in whom we placed our confidence; until at last God has taken them all away from us, and has inflicted upon us such a want of sincere ministers of the word, that a man may now travel from the east of England to the west, and from the north to the south, without being able to discover a single preacher, who out of a pure heart and faith unfeigned is seeking the glory of our God.  He has taken them all away.  (And here I mean queen Anne, who was beheaded, together with her brother; also the Lord Cromwell, with Latimer and the other bishops.)  Oh the great wrath and indignation of God! yea, rather the far greater mass of our sins, by reason of which the tender severity of God could not but inflict upon us this punishment!  But whither am I wandering?  It is as though a swine should endeavor to instruct Minerva.  I will therefore return to the subject.
  At the time when the lord Cromwell was imprisoned, the king held a public assembly of the nobility, bishops, and certain of the citizens, according to the custom of this country, and which our people call a parliament; in which were published more than forty-eight new statutes, (and the king intends them to be of perpetual obligation,) of which I here only mention a few, but not all, of those which concern religion.  The following is the title of one statute, thus set forth by the king and parliament:  A bill for moderating the penalties inflicted upon priests for incontinence.  You have heard, I know, my honored master, of the statute that was put forth among us in the year 1539, against six articles of the Christian religion.  One clause of it, if you remember, provided that priests were to put away their wives, upon pain of being condemned as felons, upon the first conviction.  But by the same statute it was allowed priests to commit fornication once or twice; but if they were detected a third time, they were to be hung as they do thieves in this country.  Felony has from olden time been punished among us with the gallows, if the thing stolen exceeded the value of six batzen.  The king has considered the punishment provided by the statute, namely, that aforesaid, the title of which you have heard, of hanging upon a third conviction, to be too severe, or, as we say, extreme.  And it is therefore the king’s pleasure for parliament to enact, that priests should for the first offence be punished by fine; then, upon a second conviction, by the loss of one benefice, if the priest should have more than one; and for the third time, by the forfeiture of all their temporal goods, together with all their preferment whatever, and perpetual imprisonment during life.  And yet meanwhile it does not appear to the king at all “extreme” still to hang those clergymen who marry, or who retain those wives whom they had married previously to the former statute.
  Another bill bears the following title, “An Act to dissolve the king’s pretended marriage with the lady Anne of Cleves.”  I will procure this that you may have it translated into Latin, word for word.  And yet, what is pretended shortly after the preamble, that the commonalty of the realm have had many doubts and perplexities respecting that marriage, is altogether false.  For not a man would have dared to open his mouth to mention such doubts and perplexities, even if they had existed, which was not the case.  What a termination will the godly expect to this bill, which is thus founded upon falsehood!  It is false too, what the statute declares, that the nobility and members of parliament petitioned the king to refer the whole matter concerning this marriage to the consideration of his clergy: whereas it is certain, that no nobleman or citizen would have dared to utter a single word about that business, either openly or in secret, until they had perceived that the king’s affections were alienated from the lady Anne to that young girl Catharine, the cousin of the duke of Norfolk, whom he married immediately upon Anne’s divorce.  As to the reply of the archbishop of Canterbury and the other bishops to the king’s letter, requiring them to examine and decide upon the case, “that they had found Anne of Cleves was still a maid, and had never been carnally known by the king,” this is a likely thing forsooth!  Who, judging of the king by his fruits, would ever believe him to be so chaste a character?  Especially when he was in such a hurry as to send for her before Christmas, and to have her alone with him every day in his chamber, and in public, as a queen, during five or six months.  This single pretended fact was, as far as I can conjecture, that which these five courtiers, the bishops, with their episcopal brethren so gravely considered, and weighed, and sifted, as you find in their reply above mentioned.  Our preachers, in all their sermons, used to pray for her in these terms, “The most noble queen Anne, the right lawful wife of our sovereign Henry VIII.” &c.
  This bill, moreover, gives indemnity to all those persons who had spoken, or taken any measure, against the king’s marriage with queen Anne.  But this was done with a view to deceive, as though there were any such persons to be pardoned.  Let all England stand forth and produce even a single individual of this stamp, if it can.  And those parties who endeavored to promote the dissolution of the same marriage, have no need of a pardon from parliament, since it is most certain that they would never have made the attempt without the sanction and approval of the king.
  By the authority, too, of the same parliament, the king has imposed many burdens upon his subjects.  For there was granted him a fifth of all the yearly revenues of the bishops, and the benefices of the clergy, in addition to the tenths which he annually receives from them.  From the laity, as well the nobility, as citizens and peasantry, there was granted him the tenth of all their yearly income, patrimony, and lands; and from those who have not any patrimony or yearly revenue, there was granted the king a twentieth of their monies, goods, cattle, fruit, and all kind of property whatever.  The north of England, however, where the rebellion took place immediately after the execution of queen Anne, was now excused these payments by the favor of the king.  Moreover, this business was so artfully managed, that the archbishop of Canterbury and the other lords spiritual (as these carnal persons are called) offered the king, of their own accord, the payment of this money, in the name of all the clergy, because the king had delivered them from the yoke and bondage of the Roman pontiff.  As though they had ever been, when subject to the pope, under such a yoke as they now are; when all their property, and life itself, are at the king’s disposal!  In like manner too, the laity made the king a voluntary grant of this money, which they are bound by parliament to pay under a heavy penalty.  But every thing is given freely and voluntarily in this country!
  In the same parliament, too, the king published a general, or, so to speak, an universal pardon, by which he forgave the nobility and others of his subjects all heresies, treasons, felonies, with many other offences against the laws and statutes of the realm, committed before the first of July, 1540, (with the exception of such crimes as might fairly be interpreted as having been committed by word or deed against the royal person;) and also voluntary homicides, robbing churches, and many crimes of the like nature.  It was however provided that this act of indemnity was not to extend to the lord Cromwell; nor to doctor Barnes, Thomas Garrard, William Jerome, three preachers who were then in prison for the sake of the gospel; nor to the two sons of a certain marquis (who had been beheaded,) and of the lord Montague, the brother of Pole, an Englishman, a cardinal of Rome.  The name of him [who was beheaded] was marquis of Exeter: he would have been the heir to the throne, had the king been without lawful issue.  Many other also of the nobility were excepted from this pardon; among whom was the popish bishop of Chichester, and a man of the name of Wilson (who had, on a former occasion, been pardoned by the king, and set at liberty after two years’ imprisonment for his support of the pope), together with some other priests, who, as they maintained the supremacy of the pope, would not admit the king’s title, wherein he styles himself “supreme head of the church of England.”  All anabaptists too were excepted, and sacramentaries, as they are called, and all those who do not admit transubstantiation; and those, likewise, who affirm that every kind of death, together with the time and hour of the same, is so certainly appointed, foreordained, and determined, that neither the king can change it by the sword, nor any one prevent it by his own rashness.  These are the very words of the statute.
  A little before the aforesaid pardon was granted, very many persons, especially the preachers of the gospel, were imprisoned in every part of England; and at London four or five of the principal of them.  They made search too after Doctor Crome, a man of great gravity and wisdom, (who, together with Latimer, was the first who in our times sowed the pure doctrine of the gospel;) he, when he heard from a certain Nicodemean individual that he was denounced, went privately to the palace, and falling on his knees before the king, (after he had first informed him of the cruel treatment of some preachers and citizens at London,) prayed him for God’s sake to put a stop to these severities, and of his wisdom and godliness to apply a remedy.  The king forthwith gave order, that no further persecution should take place on account of religion, and that those who were then in prison should be set at liberty, upon their friends giving security for their appearance whenever they should be called for.  The king, probably, as you have heard, was partly induced to grant this indulgence, in the hope that when these things were once set at rest, and the old errors (as he considered them) forgiven, the people would be more quiet and obedient in future.  I am aware, nevertheless, that it is usual for his clemency to bestow pardon upon his subjects in this way (some particular crimes, as in the present case, always excepted), after they had allowed him by their liberality (as they have now done) to scrape together a large sum of money; or when, by authority of parliament, they have entirely released him from the payment of every penny that he had borrowed from them.
  Soon after the dissolution of parliament, namely, on the thirtieth of July last year, were executed six of those men who had been excepted from the general pardon.  Three of them were popish priests, whose names were Abel, Powell, and Fetherston, and who refused to acknowledge the king’s new title, and his authority over the clergy.  They were dealt with in the usual manner, first hung, then cut down from the gallows while yet alive, then drawn, beheaded, and quartered, and their limbs fixed over the gates of the city; but the heads, in general, of as many priests or monks as are executed in this city, are fixed on the top of a long pole, and placed upon London bridge, as a terror to others.  The remaining three wee preachers of the gospel, and of no mean order; their names were Barnes, Gerrard, and Jerome.  They were first brought from the Tower of London, and drawn on a sledge through the middle of the city to a place called Smithfield, where they were tied to one stake, and burned at the same place where the others were executed.  This place had never been used before, as far as I remember, for the execution of any persons excepting heretics.  They remained in the fire without crying out, but were as quiet and patient as though they had felt no pain; and thus they commended their spirits to God the Father by Jesus Christ.  I could never ascertain, though I have made diligent inquiry, the true reason why these three gospellers were excepted from the general pardon; so that I can conjecture none more likely, than that the king, desiring to gratify the clergy and the ignorant and rude mob, together with the obstinate part of his nobility and citi8zens, appointed these three victims, as he probably considered them, as it were for a holocaust, to appease those parties, or to acquire fresh popularity with them.  I think however, that they would not have had more than one, or at most two of them in the same year, only that the clergy and the greater part of the nobility and commonalty might pay more readily the money granted to his majesty by parliament.  If any one should assert that these three persons were burned on account of their preaching and doctrine, it then appears strange that they were not brought before the judges, and condemned by due course of law, as had always been the practice in such cases before this instance.  Then again, in my opinion, the parliament did not deal justly, if it condemned them for their doctrine.  For I know this for a fact, that from the twelfth of July, 1539, (on which day the bill by which the truth was condemned began to take effect,) until the day when they were apprehended, they never once opened their mouths expressly against that statute, either in their public preaching or private conversation, except when they found that they were with honest and godly men, and sufficiently safe from their enemies.  They were committed to prison in Easter-week of the following year, 1540, even after they had in many things submitted to the king in their sermons at Easter.  Thus we see that neither the king nor his parliament could justly condemn them to death for their doctrine, unless they chose to assert that all those opinions, which in the statute aforesaid they condemned as heresy, were not pardoned before that appointed day, the twelfth of July.  And if this were the case, it was then only an artifice and a snare to entangle men, thus to fix and appoint a stated day when the act was to begin to take effect.  I am here more brief, by reason of a little book printed in German, concerning the protest of the said Robert Barnes at the stake, where he acknowledged that he did not know for what reason he was brought thither to be burned.  In the week following the burning of these preachers, were executed many others of those who had been excepted from the general pardon.  The reason of their execution is unknown to me; but it was reported to have been for treason against the king.  However, to confess the truth, people were not so active in inquiry, or in investigating matters, as they were wont to have been, because it is now no novelty among us to see men slain, hung, quartered, or beheaded; some for trifling expressions, which were explained or interpreted as having been spoken against the king; others for the pope’s supremacy; some for one thing, and some for another.  The bishop of Chichester, however, and doctor Wilson, such a papist as Eckius, were set at large by the king, notwithstanding they had been exempted out of the general pardon.  The crime of treason, as I hear, which they had committed against the king, was the sending some alms to the papist Abel, when reduced to the greatest distress from having been long kept in a most filthy prison, and, as the papists here affirm, almost eaten up by vermin.
  And now I am about to say somewhat of that learned and godly man, doctor Crome.  At this time (as had always been his practice, whenever any storm arose that seemed to do injury to the truth) feeling the necessity of the case, he preached with more zeal than ordinary, until the approach of Christmas.  And on that day those who were his enemies on account of the gospel, brought together against him some articles which they alleged to be heretical.  Meanwhile the clergy set up their champion Wilson, to oppose the purer doctrine of Crome, and to affirm the falsehood of whatever truths he had preached.  This those wise children of this world did with the greater readiness, that they might have a better handle for accusing Crome (as though it was through his preaching that such a controversy had arisen in the city of London), and so for bringing him forth to answer for himself either before the king or his council.  Which object they effected after a few days.  For after Christmas-day they were both of them forbidden to preach, until either the king or his councilors should hear the case and determine it according to their pleasure.  After Christmas-day, 1540, (for our people begin to reckon the new year from the feast of the annunciation of Mary), a day having been appointed for the appearance of both parties, namely, Crome and Wilson, the enemies of Crome produced against him, as impious and heretical, nearly thirty passages from his late sermons; the sum of which, as far as I am able to judge, is as follows:
  “No works can justify in the same manner as Christ does, nor do they so satisfy as he satisfied by suffering for us.  For he is the only oblation, and price of redemption, &c.
  “No truth is necessary to be believed or obeyed by us under the penalty of sin or eternal death, unless it be somewhere expressly revealed to us in the holy scriptures, or can truly, piously, and justly be collected and deduced from them.
  “To offer masses for the dead is plainly contrary to holy scripture, and is a superstition.  And it was first,” he says, “introduced into the church by means of a vision, yea, rather a delusion of Satan, in the time of pope Gregory.”
  “The king himself confesses, with his bishops, in his Institution of a Christian Man, that the masses scalœ cœli, ordained by the pope, are altogether unprofitable to the dead.  But this is the principal kind of mass for the departed, by reason of the prayers, &c.  Wherefore, if these masses profit not, much less do others.  Again, if the mass were profitable to the dead, the king and parliament have done wrong in destroying the monasteries, where so many masses were endowed and celebrated for the dead.
  “Those who teach men to pray to the saints, if only that they may pray for us in the same way as here we pray for each other, inculcate a practice neither necessary nor useful.
  “The church of Christ is the spouse of Christ.  But she must certainly be an imperious and pert wife, who should speak and exercise authority above her husband.  You call us seditious preachers, and say that we introduce new doctrine; but you speak falsely.  For you are the seditious parties, who defend superstition and human traditions, and refuse to obey with us the word of God, and to listen to the voice of Christ.
  “Men wonder that we preachers cannot agree together.  But this is not to be wondered at.  For they teach the commandments of men; we, on the contrary, those of God alone.  And yet, if they would give over preaching their dreams, falsehoods, human traditions, and puerilities, and would preach, as we do, the word of God only, we should forthwith come to an agreement.
  “The church of Christ is suffering, and ever will suffer, persecution, as some parties have suffered of late among ourselves.  And though the world tried to persuade them, it was by no means able to overcome them.  Neither, I hope, shall you conquer us, notwithstanding your persecution of us.  For you would be able to say that you had conquered us, if you could prevail with us to speak as you do.  But we should then be liars like yourselves, and chaplains of the devil, as you are.”
  When the king and his council had received these and other like articles, of which Crome was accused, they allowed him a certain time wherein to answer them.  Which when he had done, (as appears from the royal injunction which he was ordered to recite to the people,) his reply was beyond doubt a manifest confirmation of the articles alleged against him; for he persisted in affirming that they were true and orthodo The king, however, whether from a secret horror, or fear of the people, (or from the working of God, in I know not what other manner,) were he to condemn to death so eminent a man, who was, as it were, a father in religion, would not deliver him to the flames to be sacrificed as a burnt-offering, like Barnes and the others; but sent him a certain paper, with which he was to comply in all respects, as you shall now hear; for the following is a copy of it:
  “THE JUDGMENT OF THE KING RESPECTING DR. CROME, ON THE 18TH JANUARY, IN THE YEAR OF OUR LORD 1540  The king’s majesty, having received the answer of Edward Crome, doctor in divinity, to certain articles about which he was examined by chosen commissioners appointed by his majesty on that behalf; the king’s excellency, too, being advised that the said doctor Crome was so manifestly persuaded in his heart, as he confessed in his answer subscribed with his own hand, and laid before his majesty; the king, out of his most godly benignity, and accustomed goodness and mercy, is content for this time to relax the rigor and severity of the laws which his majesty might justly execute against the said Crome.  Moreover, his royal majesty, being desirous of establishing a Christian peaceableness and tranquility among his subjects, by an uniform agreement in the office of preaching, has determined as follows, &c.”
  The king then enjoined Dr. Crome to preach on a certain day in Lent, at London, in St. Paul’s church-yard, (namely, that of our principal church,) and there recant all the preceding articles.  Then at the end of this royal document there was added the following, which Crome was to repeat, after he had read his recantation:  “Moreover, his majesty makes this known to all his subjects, that if the said Crome shall hereafter be accused of thee or the like articles, the severity of the law shall be executed upon him without any favor.”  Against Crome’s assertion, that masses did not benefit the dead, it was objected at the trial, that he had preached in that article expressly against the royal statutes, which enacted that private masses had been properly retained in the church of England, by reason of the many advantages that Christians receive from them.  But the statute does not specify those advantages; so that Crome answered, that he understood them to be, the commemoration of the death of Christ by the ceremonies of the mass, and also prayers for the living; especially as the king had abolished so many monasteries.  This evasion did not avail him, for the king enjoined him in his instructions to read his recantation of that article in thee terms:  “Public and private masses are a profitable sacrifice as well for the living as for the dead.  And although masses and other prayers and helps profit the departed, yet the king’s majesty and the parliament have piously and justly abolished the monasteries in his realm.”  For what reason, it was not added.
  You have here the sum of the king’s judgment respecting Dr. Crome in this matter.  Now when the Sunday came, on which he was to recant, he preached a godly discourse, and at the end of it told the people, that he had received a written document from the king’s majesty which he was ordered to read to them.  And after he had read it, he committed the congregation to God in a short prayer, and so went away: whereas the king certainly intended him to receive that writing as a specimen of the doctrine which he was to follow in his sermon; and also to extol to the skies his wisdom, learning, and mercy, as doctor Barnes and the two others had done, when they preached at Easter, and yet were burned notwithstanding.  It certainly was not the king’s intention that Crome should read his judgment so carelessly, and then go away as he did: wherefore I am afraid that the clergy will not let him off thus.  For immediately after he was forbidden by the king to preach any more, as he had before forbidden Latimer, bishop of Worcester, and Shaxton, bishop of Salisbury; who by the providence of God, as I think, (and as also is evident from their having been so long preserved by him in this dangerous world,) were delivered from death by the general pardon.  Those two bishops were a long time under restraint, because they would never give their sanction to the statute published against the  truth in the year 1539, as the other Ecebolian bishops did at once.  But how favorable to them the king now is, and how much he appreciates their sound and pure doctrine, is evident even from this, that he has not only prohibited them from preaching, but also from coming within two or three German miles of our two universities, the city of London, or their own dioceses!  O atrocious deed, thus to drive away faithful shepherds from their flocks, and intrude ravenous wolves in their stead!  God will not, I hope, allow this tyranny much longer.  Meanwhile, you perceive how much iniquity abounds among us, and therefore that in many respects charity is growing cold.  Farewell in the Lord!  May our good and gracious God long preserve you in safety to us, and for the edification and comfort of his church!  Amen, Amen.

LETTER CVI. RICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Frankfort
Sept. 18, 1541
  Grace and perseverance in truth from the Lord, &c.  I received, my revered master, three days since, your pious and consolatory letter, dated on the 31st of August; on account of which I consider myself exceedingly indebted to your kindness, for having so condescended to correspond with me, a worm, and not a man, (as the world accounts me,) and also so frequently and in such comforting terms.
  Falckner wrote to me for the black and red cloth, which I send you by Conrad Eblie, that it may be for you to fix and determine whether Falckner shall have it upon credit.  For he owes me already about a hundred florins, to be paid here at Frankfort at the next fair, besides forty-five which (as he writes me word) Christopher Froschover ought now to pay me, but which I doubt whether I shall ever receive: for he says in reply, that he is willing to pay these same forty-five florins for Flackner, should he have a good sale at the fair, but not otherwise.  The black cloth contains fifty-five Frankfort ells; the red fifty and a half.  The black cloth is tolerably good and strong, but I had sold all my best before Falckner’s letter was delivered to me.  I inquired after it of the above-named Christopher at the beginning of the fair; but he denied that he had any letters for me, because he hardly knew who I was.  I met him afterwards, and he found Falckner’s letter for me.  The price of forty ells of that cloth is twenty-two florins.  I have sent you also another piece, of a better sort, which I have left at this fair, and which contains forty-five ells.  Should it seem advisable to you, I wish Falckner to have this, in case he declines the black.  But this cloth bears a higher price, namely, twenty-eight florins for forty ells, reckoning sixteen batzen to a florin.  Falckner knows that we are accustomed to receive this value for every florin.  I pray you to dispose of whatever cloth he may leave to some one else, and lay out the amount this year for the benefit of the poor, (if you have among you any who are exiles for the gospel’s sake).  If you decline doing this, by reason of not having among you exiles of this description, (and I admit no other claim,) I then wish you to make over the same sum to master Calvin for the same object.  I am thinking moreover of sending you, by the Conrad above-mentioned, a fifth piece of cloth, of another color, which a great number of my countrymen are accustomed to wear.  I have much pleasure in making you a present of this, as being the stoutest.  If you decline accepting it (which I hope you will not), you shall pay the money for it when I come.  The price is thirty-two florins.  Both here and at Strasburgh I am beginning to sell some cloth of the same color, which as hitherto been very little in use.
  I cannot, by reason of my engagement, write this letter over again, either in a better or a larger hand.  For I am here alone.  At Strasburgh likewise I have no domestics, except one female servant.  I have left them all but one in England; for I have still an establishment in that country, such as it is.  I only brought one servant with me from England, who at that time appeared to every one to be most zealous; and certainly, as long as he lived with me there, he was truly pious: but after he had seen the simplicity of the religious worship in this country, and especially not having his friends with him, and abundance of provisions and meat in the larder, as with us, he seemed to me very much to wish to return home.  When I discovered this, I discharged him, after having given him a letter, by which he might obtain a situation with another master in the same line of business.  I previously, however, set before him, as well as I was able, the wickedness of falling away from the truth on any ground of superstition.  He left me notwithstanding; but I hope that he still continues to savor of Christ in some measure.  He is now living with a certain merchant, who in the time of liberty, three years since, professed the gospel among us after his way.  But what indeed am I saying?  I scarcely know any one (with the exception of learned teachers,) who had a greater knowledge of religion than our friend Peterson.  My late servant requests you to send his letters to Clare:  I have enclosed them in my own letter, which in addition to this I have already sent you by Froschover.  After he returned home from Strasburgh, from which place he fled with the greatest danger, he could not be compelled by the severest threatenings of his master; but said that things were optional, and indifferent, and I know not what.  By what means or by what persons he has been thus infatuated, I know not; but this I know, that before my departure he voluntarily attended masses for the departed, and now does so on every feast-day through almost the whole autumn, as is the custom here.  His wife indeed had a tolerable fotunre; he had with her, as I think, above three or four hundred golden angels of our money.
  My wife requests you to be kind enough to ask Falckner to send hither to Strasburgh, as soon as possible, a hundred, or at the least eighty pounds of the best butter.  If he cannot contrive to send so large a vessel to my house, I wish him to send it to my friend, John Burcher, (who lodges either with master Myconius or master Isengrinius,) that he may send it to Basle for me, and I will pay whatever expense he may have incurred.  I gave Christopher Froschover for you an English cheese with this mark +, wrapped in a linen cloth.  My wife wished me to send one of the same kind to you and your wife, that you might make trial of our cheese as we do of your butter.  But I would not have you return any thanks for this.  I would not indeed on any account that you should trouble yourself to write your thanks for things of such little value as the trifling presents of my wife.  I will diligently salute brother B. in your name.  I do not understand the other matter about which you wrote.  I shall therefore say nothing about it, lest I should still more cast down the mind of him who is sufficiently cast down already.  Should he happen to be summoned and sent for home, and should refuse to come, he will lose all that he now has.  He is now anxious upon this subject, but more especially because, if that event should take place, it is not likely that he will obtain the lady he wishes to marry; one who is truly pious, but, as I hear, from some constant disorder unsuited to the married state.  Farewell.
          Yours,
            RICHARD HILLES.
  P.S.  I am not a citizen of Strasburgh, for fear of losing the privileges I already enjoy in England and Brabant.  The senate of Strasburgh is very well disposed towards me.  I pay them ten florins every year.  I have not taken any oath.
  It has happened, honored sir, that before this my letter was sealed, Christopher Froschover has paid me the forty-five florins owing to me by Falckner, and which were to be paid at this fair.  He offered also to be answerable for whatever cloth I might choose to send to the aforesaid Falckner: so that there is no occasion for you to keep by you the cloth which I have above stated I would send you by Conrad Eblie; excepting only that black cloth at twenty-eight florins, together with those eight ells of yours, at thirty-two florins, as I above stated.  I request you also to be kind enough to tell Falckner, that it has just come into my mind how often he used to speak to me about the yellow cloth; and that I have therefore sent him thirty-one ells by the aforesaid Conrad, together with thirty-one ells and a half of white cloth, and twenty ells of green.  The price of these is the same as that of the two entire pieces above-mentioned, namely, twenty-two florins for forty Frankfort ells.  I request you, in case he should refuse any of these pieces of cloth, kindly to take them under your care, till I send you word by letter to whom you may deliver them; unless you should happen to know any friend of yours who will take them at the same price, and send me the amount without fail by master Christopher Froschover, at the next Frankfort fair.  For he has given me a bill in Falckner’s name for one hundred and three florins and six batzen, which is the exact price of the two entire pieces, with these last half pieces that I mentioned above.  All these cloths, of which I have made mention in this letter, with the exception of your eight ells (which I have not cut from the same cloth that Conrad Eblie bought of me, lest you should perhaps wish to have another ell), are stamped upon their leaden seal with this my mark in the margin (x).
  You will receive, together with this letter, the opinion of our friend Capito on original sin.  I have no news from England this fair, except that the king has not yet returned to London from the northern parts of the kingdom: whither he proceeded with one thousand soldiers, after a new fashion, and a great number of tents, after the French fashion, to reduce a rebellious and very superstitious people.  About twenty persons (of whom about twelve had formerly been monks) had endeavored, five months since, secretly to raise a new disturbance in those parts: they were beheaded, hung, and drawn, after our custom, the June following, at London and York, which are the two principal cities in the kingdom.  The king, before his setting out, beheaded also the mother of our countryman the cardinal, with two others of our oldest nobility.  I do not hear that any of the royal race are left, except the nephew of the cardinal, and another boy, the son of the marquis of Exeter.  They are both children, and in prison, and condemned, I know not why, except that it is said that their fathers had sent letters to Rome to the pope, and to their kinsman, the cardinal.  The king’s son by the third wife is still alive, but I do not speak about him.  There is also living a natural son of king Edward, whose daughter Henry VII., the father of our present king, married after the death of Richard the second [third].  But shortly before I left England he was sent from Calais (where he had formerly been the king’s lieutenant, and, as you know, too near upon France,) to the Tower of London, the receptacle for such persons, where he was imprisoned by parliament at the same time as lord Cromwell was condemned, and still remains there waiting for the king’s pardon.  This illegitimate old man, when at Calais, was a most grievous persecutor of the gospel. (Edward left two sons, heirs of his kingdom, under the protection of the aforesaid Richard, their uncle.  This Richard privately put to death these two amiable youths, his nephews, and for nearly three years held forcible possession of the kingdom.)  Another of the chief nobility, a most cruel tyrant, not long after, fell from his horse, who was galloping of his own accord; but he never afterwards spoke a word, for he miserably broke his neck.  This was the earl of Essex, whose property and lands, with his great manors and riches, Cromwell immediately obtained, but not for any length of time, as I know you have head before now, if you have received the former letter sent by Froschover.
  Strasburgh, Sept 25  The king has appointed Thomas, archbishop of Canterbury, and the chancellor of the kingdom, (both of whom are now considered as our friends,) to be his deputies in the south of England.  But immediately on the king’s departure they burnt at the stake in London, for fear, (as our English gospellers think,) a young man eighteen years of age, on account of his entertaining the Lutheran opinion touching the eucharist.  He did not altogether deny a corporal presence, but asserted, as our Wycliffe did, that the accident of bread did not remain there without the substance.  Again farewell.  The son of that great light of the world, master Zuinglius, is dead here, or rather has fallen asleep; as have also  many others, of whom there were the greatest hopes, in the college of Strasburgh.  Once more farewell, and live happily in the fear of the Lord!

LETTER CVII. RICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Nov. 23, 1541
  The consolation of the Holy Ghost in your studies, attended as they sometimes are with so much anxiety!
  I received, most learned sir, your very gratifying letter on the twentieth of November.  For your loving me as a brother (as I have frequently perceived to be the case from your former letters) I return you my warmest thanks.  I now repent of having sent Falckner the cloth, because he is annoyed at my having sent him so much.  I should not have sent him the black unclipped cloth, of which he complains, had not his letter been delivered to me so late at Frankfort.  Nevertheless, I cannot let him have that cloth for eighteen florins; for it cost me more than twenty florins in England.  Still, however, as it is now yonder, and especially as the texture is so thick, and the wool coarse, I will be content with twenty florins, if he chooses to keep it.  If he does not like to do so, I pray you to receive back the cloth from him, and keep it by you until I write you word about it after next fair, or sooner.  For I may probably think fit, if Falckner should decline it, to devote it to another purpose.  I did not reckon the fine cloth at more than twenty-eight florins.  I sold Falckner some of the same quality, and at the same price, at the last Strasburgh fair.  And yet I hardly know what to say about that cloth, as your merchants think it so dear, except that you advise master Falckner to return it to me next Lent, by some carrier of his acquaintance, who will pass through this place on his way to Frankfort.  For I have no doubt but that I can sell it here at the same, or perhaps a greater price.  If Falckner sends back the cloth, he will very much oblige me by sending at the same time three reams of the best paper that is manufactured by master Froschover.   A ream contains twenty quires, and is called in German ein Riecks.  I am greatly in want of paper of that sort.  I have written this letter on a sheet of such paper as I require; but should he have any of a better quality, I wish he would send one or two reams more, for Miles Coverdale, and the other English who are here.  I will pay Froschover or Falckner for this paper, God willing, at the next fair.  I request, moreover, master Froschover to pay you yonder on my account fifteen florins and twelve batzen for half the entire piece of fine black cloth, intended for the use you know of, (if Falckner will forward it to me here,) and I will faithfully repay the amount to Froschover at Frankfort.  I am satisfied with your proposal respecting the other half pieces of cloth, namely, that Falckner may retain them, on condition that, if he is able to dispose of them, he shall pay me the money at the next fair; if not, he is to deliver them afterwards to some one at Frankfort, whom I will point out to him.
  I have sent some maxims to your excellency, not that you may write back your opinion respecting them, for I cannot desire such an interruption to your studies on my account; but I shall be greatly obliged to you, if, when I come, you will condescend to tell me what you think about them.  Salute, I pray you, my dear brother Falckner, and thank him in my name for the butter, which has been of great use to my family this winter.  Request him too to remember the paper above-mentioned.  He wishes me to let him know whether I have yet received your letter from the Frenchman, Von Homberg.  In my last letter, if you remember, I informed your excellency of my having received it.  I purpose sending you by the bearer a quart of fenugreek, if he does not refuse to take it with him.  My wife salutes yours, and do you also salute her in my name.  May the God of all might preserve you from the baneful pestilence, and protect you under his wing, that his kingdom may be more widely extended by you on earth, and your reward be so much greater in heaven!  Amen.
            Yours in the Lord,
              RICHARD HILLES.
  P.S.  I have sent the fenugreek to Basle, to John Burcher, and Englishman, who lodges at the house of master Myconius or Isengrinius.

LETTER CVIII. RICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
May 10, 1542
  Health and perseverance in the truth of Christ!  After I returned home safe from Venice, I received your letter written on the 31st of March, and was affected on the perusal of it with no small delight, that you were engaged about a work so pious and so useful to the church, as to have it in contemplation to publish some books of commentaries upon Matthew.  May our great and good God prosper your intention, and give it a happy issue!
  Nothing has yet been done with H. Falckner at Frankfort respecting the fine cloth, and there is no reason why he should expect that I either will or can abate him a single batz.  If, however, there should be left any of the same quality, I am content that he should send it me here to our fair; and I shall be as willing to receive the remainder of the cloth as the money itself; for I am well aware what kind of cloth it was.  I scarcely charged eleven batzen and a kreutzer for a Frankfort ell.  and if I had the same cloth here, I could soon sell it by the piece at twelve batzen for a Strasburgh ell.  I entreat you, my master, that we no longer defer the appropriation of that money, which I have destined out of the produce of this same cloth for the use of the poor exiles, namely, half the price of the same, or, if you choose, the whole of it.  For I have already given master Calvin some money for the like purpose, although I mentioned not a word to him about you or that cloth, and never intend to do.  Distribute therefore, what I have desired of my own free-will to be applied to the poor by your instrumentality; whether you choose to retain either the price of half the cloth, or, if need so require, of the whole.  For the more I devote to them through you, so much the less do I leave to be applied to the like object by myself.  Whatever I do in this matter, I do it voluntarily and cheerfully, and without a murmur.  I therefore pray you, that, whether you determine to retain half the sum, if you prefer it, or the whole sum, as I prefer myself, you will let me know by letter at our next fair.  For I desire that, immediately on the receipt of this letter, you receive from H. Falckner thirty-one florins and a half (reckoning sixteen batzen to a florin) on account of that cloth; so that when Falckner shall come, there may be no occasion for any farther reckoning between him and me respecting it.  Should he object, that he does not choose to purchase the cloth at that price, I pray you in that case to receive from him what is left, and sell it there, if you can, to your friends, or (which I would prefer for fear of interrupting your studies) take care that it may be forwarded by some merchant to me here, and I will in return faithfully send you the amount in money to Zurich.
  I am glad that you have commended to me by letter Peter Hurtzel, and especially Andrew Rappenstein; and if my wife had known as much at the last fair, she would not have required C. Froschover to be surety for them.  I beg however that they will not be offended at what my wife did in this business; for she had never seen them before, nor, as I remember, had ever heard them commended by me as they deserve.  Those two honest men dealt honorably with me at Frankfort at the preceding fair; for they owed me at that time about one hundred and thirty-three florins, all of which, save three, they sent me by master Conrad Eblie.  But Henry did not act by me with so much good faith: for he owed me at the last fair (besides the fine cloth above-mentioned) near two hundred florins; out of which . . . . .  he has only paid forty-six florins and fourteen batzen for a friend of mine at Basle; and these he paid so long after they were due, that my friend was obliged to send his servant from Strasburgh to Basle, during Lent, with twenty out of those forty-six florins, because Falckner, even in so small a matter, had not performed what he had promised.
  My brother Butler, as I hear by letter, sold his whole patrimony in England last Lent; but he had not then received the whole amount.  And I am in fear for him, lest, when what he has done shall have come to the king’s ears by means of his sister’s husband, who belongs to the court, he may be forbidden again to leave the kingdom.  Elliot is studying the civil law, or, to speak more properly, the laws of our realm, in which he has made such proficiency, that he is now holding an office, from whence he derives an annual income of nearly two hundred florins.  But Bartholomew Traheron has, with much difficulty, retired from court into the country, where he is about to marry the daughter of a gentleman who favors godly doctrine; and with this young lady he will have a yearly income, as I hear, of one hundred and twenty florins, for sixty years, out of some estate which is leased to him for that time by his father-in-law for a certain sum.  He intends, moreover, to teach grammar, and to keep a school for little boys, in some small town in that district.
  Respecting the state of the kingdom at large I have nothing certain to communicate, except what I imagine you must have heard these three months, namely, that the king has beheaded his wife, Catherine Howard, whom he married immediately after his divorce from Anne of Cleves.  This Catherine was condemned upon a great suspicion of adultery (as is universally reported by the English) with two gentlemen, who had also intercourse with her before the king married her.  The lady Rochford too, the widow of that nobleman who was capitally punished, as you know, for incest with his sister, queen Anne, was beheaded at the same time.  This widow, as they say, was privy to the licentiousness of that Catherine who was lately beheaded: for she used often to sleep with the queen; and when she knew her once to have been a long time absent from her bed-chamber in a private place, at the same time, as they say, that one of those gentlemen who were beheaded was there, she nevertheless refrained from mentioning the circumstance to the king.
  The old duchess dowager of Norfolk is also condemned to perpetual imprisonment in the Tower of London, and likewise lord William Howard, a brother of the duke of Norfolk, because they were cognizant of the vicious life of queen Catherine, when the king first fell in love with her, and did not acquaint him with it before that hasty marriage had taken place.  One of the parties, who was first hanged, and afterwards beheaded and quartered, for adultery with the queen, was one of the king’s chamberlains; and two years before, or less, had violated the wife of a certain park-keeper in a woody thicket, while, horrid to relate! three or four of his most profligate attendants were holding her at his bidding.  For this act of wickedness he was, notwithstanding, pardoned by the king, after he had been delivered into custody by the villagers on account of this crime, and likewise a murder which he had committed in his resistance to them, when they first endeavored to apprehend him.  God, who is just, will not always suffer wickedness, either here or elsewhere, to go unpunished.
  You cannot, without danger to my affairs, write me anything concerning the Christian religion: besides, if you could, I am not worthy of such honor.  I have therefore to return many thanks to your benevolence for your favorable inclination towards me; and I pray you to confer this honor upon some one else, who may be worthy of it.  I received your cheese before sealing this letter, and I am very sorry that you have spent so much money on my account; and most of all, that you are ill of a fever.  But all the works of the Lord are just judgments, who chastiseth those whom he loves, and scourges every son whom he receives.  I pray you to accept, as a present from me, those eight ells of cloth, and not to send the money; for I heartily wish you to keep it, and to make use of the cloth, if you please, as a token, such as it is, that I love you in the Lord, and have a real affection for you.  After having read over again this barbarous letter of mine, I was so ashamed of it, that I was almost determined to tear it, and not to write to you at all; and I certainly should have done so, had you not invited me to write to you upon the state of all our affairs.
  And now, my most esteemed master, farewell in Christ: for in future I have no intention of writing to you again, except, perhaps, by some amanuensis when necessity obliges me.  My wife salutes you, and your most amiable lady.  Deign also to salute your wife in my name.  Once more, farewell to God, who is our portion in the land of the living, and our hope in eternity!  Amen.
        Yours, you know who,
            RICHARD HILLES.

LETTER CIRICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Dec. 18, 1542
  I received your books, most esteemed master, together with the letter; and I feel more gratitude for them in my heart than I can express with my pen.  And yet, had I known that you were about to present me with those books, I should certainly have bought a copy for myself at Frankfort, and not have said a word to you about them.  For why should I lay an additional burden upon your kindness, after the great expense you have already incurred there on my account?  I wish, sir, I had consulted you sooner about reading authors and studying histories.  For first I read Bernard Justiniani on the affairs of the Venetians, the Tripartite History, and the Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius, together with his Evangelical preparation, and Demonstration.  I do not so much regret having read them, only that I now perceive from your letter, that I could have employed the time I spent in perusing them to better purpose.
  The Demonstration of Eusebius was rather wearisome to me, because the holy scriptures are very where explained so absurdly, if I may use such an expression, especially with respect to the WORD, and against the Jews.  He seems moreover, to entertain wrong notions about free-will, the marriage of the clergy, and the fifth chapter of Matthew.  I found some things, however, in that work which pleased me exceedingly; for instance, his opinion respecting the new testament, and about Daniel’s seventy weeks.  I ran through thee books before I came to Zurich; and also Tertullian, whom I found to be such as you had commended him to me.  I was not so much displeased with the difficulty of his style, as I was delighted and profited by his remarkable piety, simplicity, and right judgment respecting the eucharist, as well as on many other points.  I collected many things from him, (as also from the ecclesiastical histories,) by which I shall be able to stop the mouths of many of my countrymen, who are always telling us, that to the pure all things are pure; that God is a spirit; that he only requires of us our heart, and a mind well imbued with knowledge,--and the like epicurean sentiments.
  I happened to light upon that author on sale here in the market, on which occasion (not, as I think, without the providence of God) I bought and read him over.  But as he was scarcely known to me by name before, he procured me this advantage, namely, of affording the first handle for my pouring forth my questions to you when I was with you.  Not however, thank God, that I am ignorant of what has been observed by many, and as you well know, that the opinions of this writer are frequently to be rejected; and that in other places he must be read with judgment, even in the treatise De prœscriptione Hœreticorum:  as when he says, that one must not dispute with heretics, nor must they be permitted to have or compare holy scripture with catholics: likewise, that what the apostles preached ought not otherwise to be proved than by means of the very same churches which they themselves founded, &c.  Although indeed he is speaking of real heretics, and of the church in his age; whose doctrine was the same as that of holy scripture, and which invented nothing of its own to remedy by omission, addition, or change any contrariety supposed to be discovered in the scriptures.
  After I returned from you, I read, first, Cyprian, and then Lactantius, the reading of which authors I do not altogether regret.  I regard the one as the defender of my cause, yea, as I think, the cause of God, against the adversaries; and the other I have become acquainted with (as you told me I should do) not without abundant fruits of godliness.
  From the death of queen Anne, who was beheaded, until my departure, some of my neighbors in London grievously detracted from my character, because I refused to give a small piece of money (for the honor of God, as it is commonly said), according to the annual custom of the parish, for placing large wax candles in the church before the crucifix and the sepulchre.  They first of all acted kindly with me, through my parents and friends, (whose opinions they knew would have great weight with me in this matter,) and brought forward a custom of I know not how many five hundred years, when a custom of only one hundred years’ continuance had with them the force of law.  I replied, that I knew of no custom that could prevail in opposition to Christ, who saith, that “God is a Spirit, &c.” Joh. iv.  They immediately objected, having been taught by the minister of the parish, “Do you then deny that God is worshipped by external “observances?”  No.  For Christ, who is not “custom,” but the truth, saith:  “Let your light so shine, &c.”  And for this reason I think he added in John iv. [24], “and in truth.”  Which clause I thus explained to them:  “In truth, that is, truly, and according to the word of God; that is to say, in innocence, piety, mercy, and holiness of life, without which no one shall see God.  But the divine Majesty is by no means worshipped by external observances, which are merely invented or devised by men for worship; for he needs not any thing, neither is he pleased with these vain and corruptible things.”  Then, after some months’ time, when they began to have some hoe of a change of affairs, they often returned to me with menaces; and threatened that, in case of my not coming to my senses, they would lay an information against me before the bishop of our diocese.  This they did, as I continued firm in my non-compliance.  But the bishop ordered them to be quiet for a short time, (at least so it was told me,) and that all things would at last turn out as they could wish.  For he was in expectation that the happy day would shortly arrive, but he did not live to see it; for being much harassed by Cromwell and others on a frivolous suspicion of not having aided the king’s attempts in abolishing the pope’s supremacy, and the destruction of the monasteries, he died miserably, being as it appeared, almost worn out with grief.  But to return to my subject.  The year but one before I left England, the public orders of the king were sent to the bishops and to the principal laity in every parish, that by reason of the superstition of the common people they were not to permit any wax candles to be burned or placed before images in the churches, except only before the crucifix, and at the festival of Easter before the sepulchre of Christ.  The churchwardens immediately sent for me, and inquired of me in the church, whether I still continued obstinate in my purpose against the king’s majesty’s injunctions.  I replied that those orders did not concern me, respecting which they appeared to me to triumph before they had gained the victory.  For I am neither, I told them, a bishop nor a churchwarden; nor, supposing I held any office of the kind, do these orders enjoin me to maintain your lights, but only not to remove them from the church, which I do not attempt to do.  Moreover, I said, from this letter, coming from the king, I have great hopes that after no long interval you will not be at liberty to burn those candles of yours any longer, either before the crucifix or at the sepulchre.  For the same result is to be expected from this tradition as from other superstitions, when it is manifest to every one, that the same planting is the work of an earthly high-priest, and will be plucked up by our heavenly Father, just as that is, which is now extirpated by the king’s commandment.  They then dismissed me, saying, “You tell us that you do not attempt to remove the holy lights from our churches, when yet you endeavor by your example to draw, if they dared, all men after you, (especially foolish boys, and young men like yourself;) refusing to do what your own and your wife’s parents, grave and prudent persons, and what all your honest neighbors, do not disdain to do.”  Which is certainly true; for my mother, as I have just heard, has paid the sum for me for one or two years, that she might appease the fury of the dogs, and that I might not fall into worse peril, as she much feared would be the case.
  After this I heard no more about this affair, except that the day after I left London for this place, or at least for Antwerp, [the bishop of] Winchester, who had just been appointed the king’s lieutenant in ecclesiastical matters, to whom I had probably been known by name, (for his diocese extends to the middle of London bridge,) being openly about to examine some of my neighbors who were apprehended before my departure, endeavored to fish out of them something about me.  And he said to one of them, in the presence of them all as they were standing in his palace, “And you, you foolish man, for what purpose did you daily receive so many persons into your house, seeing you are a poor and needy mechanic?”  The man replied “There was no such assembly of persons at my house, especially of suspected ones.”  “What,” said the bishop, “you are lame with those who halt,” (or he used some proverbial expression of the kind:) “was not Richard Hilles every day at your house, teaching you, and others like you?”  The accused denied this altogether; and my mot bitter enemies, who were men of wealth, were unwilling openly to inform against me of their own accord, in compliance with the last injunction of the king, and to be regarded in the sight of all as guilty of treachery against their neighbors.  The bishop too, not perhaps being aware of my absence, made open inquiry respecting me, and said that I should take myself off, and no longer continue to poison his flock.
  You now see, my most reverend master, what I meant by saying that Lactantius was the advocate of my cause, and that I was glad, or at least did not regret, that I had read him through.  I wondered, however, what he meant by his discourse about the pollution of demons, and of their intercourse with women; about the virtue of almsgiving; on the passion of anger, which he ascribes even to God himself; on the abstaining from the use of flowers and perfumes, which he calls the allurements of pleasure, and the weapons of the enemy of mankind: also, about the comparing and weighing good works with evil ones; about the life of the just upon earth after the day of judgment, with Christ reigning a thousand years; who, during those years, shall give all nations in bondage to the elect, who nevertheless shall again lie concealed a short time under the earth, through fear of the prince of the demons then unbound, who shall attack them, and of the multitude of the nations who shall rebel against them; with other things of the same kind, in his epitome.
  Cyprian likewise in many places seems to be too severe; especially in the 2nd Epistle of the 4th Book, where he treats of those who come to a late repentance.  He also prates most wonderfully about the purging of sins by alms-giving, and about the trial of the good by fire.  Besides, it may be doubted, in my judgment at least, whether the various passages about satisfaction can be so reconciled, as that he may appear to have a godly and correct notion of the righteousness of Christ, especially in Book I. Ep. 7, and Book III. Ep. 14, and on the merits of the martyrs and righteous, Discourse v.  Moreover, what he writes about free-will, in the Epistle to Quirinus; about the same subject, and the primacy of Peter; and on the meaning of the word water, which every where, with him, signifies in holy scripture baptism; also respecting the admixture of the holy sup with water, which he affirms Christ to have appointed at the supper.
  I determined with myself, as soon as I should have leisure, to read Origen for the sake of his antiquity; but I have now changed my mind, because you have made no mention of him in your letter to me.  Wherefore I shall substitute in his place some work of Augustine, or perhaps Jerome upon the prophets, only that this is contrary to your judgment.  I once heard master Capito, in a lecture on Isaiah, severely censure him, and say that Jerome was good for nothing except as a rhetorician.  I had not believed this before, but he seemed to have his reasons for thus finding fault with him.
  If at any time you deign to write to me again, advise me, I pray, as to the best means of retaining in memory what I have once read.  Hitherto I have been accustomed to collect into one book the heads of many common-places and sentences; but this is troublesome to me, as I am a very slow writer.  Moreover, sir, I want your books on the authority of scripture, on the office of bishops, and on the origin of error; and all of them, if it shall seem good to you, bound together.  I pray you also to send at the same time with these books the bible of Leo Judæ, if it is yet completed, or as soon after as you may meet with a fit opportunity.  But first of all fix the price, and receive it from Henry Falckner, or else I will not on any account receive the books from any one.  Lastly, I earnestly entreat you to salute the same H. Falckner and Peter Hurtzel in my  name, and tell them, that such is the state of lower Germany, that I scarcely think any English cloth will arrive at Frankfort at the next fair, by reason of the war between the emperor and the duke of Guelderland.  Wherefore, I pray both of them to pay the money that they owe me (although it is but a small sum) either to myself, or my wife (in case of my absence), here at Strasburgh; or else to provide for the payment of it through some citizens of Zurich.  For I am now in great want of it, especially during Lent, because I have neither cloth nor money with me.  For all the money which I could scrape together from my friends in every quarter, I have sent to my friends in England to lay out in cloth, and send it to Antwerp, where it now is; and they dare not transmit it into upper Germany on account of the cruel war, which may God soon deign to put an end to, for the sake of Christ our Lord and our hope!  amen.
  My wife salutes you most respectfully, and also your most amiable wife, to whom I desire my best thanks for her great favors conferred upon us, when we lived with you in those parts.  Either your wife, or the wife of Megander, wrote to my wife about something or other; but really we cannot make out what it is.  I therefore request that they will let us know what they wish for, and it shall be diligently attended to at the next fair.  I was aware that the black cloth they wanted may be bought here, only that it may be had, every one says, with you at a much cheaper rate.
  I commend myself most dutifully to masters Megander, Theodore Bibliander, and Pellican, and pray you to salute their wives in my name.  I desire also my most respectful salutations to master Erasmus and his wife.  And if, my very dear master, I can serve you in any way whatever, only command me, and you shall find me most ready to do your bidding.  But I had not intended, as your reverence knows, to write to you any more, and you know the reason; but on account of your excellent presents I am now compelled to write, and I must entreat you to take in good part my barbarous and vain prattling.  But I implore you for the Lord’s sake, to promote in your senate, as far as you may be able, the cause of my brother and fellow-countryman, John Burcher; respecting which my brother Butler, who is, as I well know, beloved by and dear to you, has lately written to you from Basle.
  I have received no news from England since the Frankfort fair: but then (as I requested Peter Hurtzel to inform you) my friends wrote me word that a war had suddenly arisen between the Scots and our countrymen, and that it was reported to have begun in the northern borders of England and the south of Scotland; whether by the Scots or ourselves, is not certainly known; they so accuse each other and excuse themselves on both sides.  This however is certain, that on account of an inroad made by the Scots, in which some of our men were slain, our king threatened that he would shortly declare war with Scotland.  The Scot was not much pleased at hearing this, but sent ambassadors into England for the maintenance of peace.  The king, as our people tell the story, promised peace upon these conditions; namely, that the king of Scotland should, at every parliament, do homage to our king and his successors, as to his superior and a potentate of more exalted rank, (as was formerly done by some of his predecessors;) that he should promise to depose the Roman pontiff with his monks, as soon as might possibly lie in his power; and admit our religion in other respects (which you are well acquainted with) into his country; that he should engage in the next place to make satisfaction to our king for damages sustained in the north, and for the great expenses which he has incurred in fitting out an army by land and a fleet by sea.  For while these matters were in treaty between these sovereigns in August and September, all necessary preparations for war were making on both sides.  The Scotsman briefly refuses almost all these conditions, except the payment of a certain sum of money which he granted to the king of England for renewing the peace, and for the expenses he had incurred.  Then the king, trusting, as I fear, in chariots and horses, and in the multitude of men, rather than in the name of God, sent into Scotland more than a hundred and twenty thousand men, who, as I have just learned from England by a letter of the 30th of November, have again returned to Scotland.  But the reason of their return was so closely confined to the leaders, that it was not generally known among us.  Meanwhile, it is here stated by those who exercise their traffic in France, that our people have suffered a loss of fourteen thousand men in Scotland.  How true this statement may be, I am at present unable to say, although I suspect something of the kind has taken place.  I know that you have already heard almost all these things from our friend John Bucher, for I acquainted him with them as they occurred.  But that you may not think that I have consigned your wish to forgetfulness or neglect, I thought it worth while to repeat the same account to you, who deserve so well of me in many respects.
  God has lately taken away from me, by two or three debtors who (as I hear from England) have become bankrupts, and by other casualties, about two hundred florins, perhaps so much the sooner because I am not there myself to manage my affairs.  But let this be told to a stone wall.  Besides, I have promised, within this month, to afford yearly (if God do not take every thing away from me) a certain sum of money to some strangers, who, having been lately banished from their country for Christ’s sake, have come hither; so that I cannot now afford you so much for the poor exiles as I would have done most cordially, had you desired me.  Nevertheless, cease not, I pray you, to remind me of my duty, and you shall find me ready according to my power.  For I know that you will not ask me to aid the poor out of my necessity, but of my abundance.  And I know what Paul requires of the rich in 1 Tim. vi. and what Christ requires every where.  But the flesh, forgetful of divine and heavenly things, and covetous and tenacious of earthly things, cannot be too often reminded of its duty.  Write to me therefore freely, whatever you will, because it may be profitable also to others.  And I hope that I shall bear your exhortation and warning as it becomes me to do.  Farewell in Christ Jesus, and live happily in God; and love your Richard as you are wont to do.
            Yours,
              RICHARD HILLES, Anglus.

LETTER CRICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Frankfort
March 24, 1543
  Praise to God!  I most humble commend myself to your piety, my revered master.  I have lately received your letter by Falckner, in which you apologize for not having been able to answer me at that time as fully, as you say, as I might probably expect.  But I must reply in my turn, that I did not require an answer of such length, though really useful and most gratifying to me, lest I should be, as I no doubt was, too troublesome to you.  I am exceedingly obliged to you on account of John Burcher, for having served him the more readily, as you say, upon my recommendation of him.
  I wrote to John Butler, a little after Christmas, respecting the king of Scotland, that he was certainly dead, and that it was reported by some persons at Antwerp that he had died of his wounds.  This was not indeed mentioned for certain in my letter, but it is allowed by the Scots themselves, that their king died immediately after some of his nobles had been taken prisoners by the English.  From that time I have received no positive intelligence from England, except that our king, without delay, sent those nobles back to Scotland, to intercede with the Scots on his behalf, and to exert themselves to the utmost of their power that the kingdom should be given or offered to him by the Scots.  But, as I have just learned from an English nobleman at this place, they obtained hardly anything from the Scots, but returned back to the king, who was completely disappointed in the result of their endeavor.  Others however of our countrymen at Antwerp boasted that the estates of Scotland, upon the entreaties or by the contrivance of these noblemen, had sent into England the Scottish cardinal [Beaton].  But my English informant above-mentioned told me just the contrary, namely, that the Scots had chosen a new king from among themselves, had implored the aid of the French king, and determined with all their power to drive back our king.  I do not hear that the king of England is in alliance with the emperor, or that he has renounced the French alliance; although it is very probable that, should the latter assist the Scots, he will shortly do so.  Nevertheless, news is brought me at this fair, that the Scots, who have taken some ships from us, are forbidden by the estates of Scotland to sell their cargo, till they have ascertained the pleasure of our king respecting it.  Some artifice may however lie concealed in this matter, for fear that the king of England may adopt stronger means of defense, and sooner prepare for war.
  Farewell, and commend me most diligently to your very dear wife, and to all those godly and learned persons with whom I have there, by your means, been made acquainted.  May God preserve you, and those like you, and do you pray for me!  Amen. I am now setting off to Nuremberg (whence I shall return, God willing, in about a month) to sell my cloth, which those friends of mine, who manage my concerns at Antwerp, did not dare to send hither this fair, on account of the duke of Juliers.  They have therefore sent them to Nuremberg, for the fair now approaching.  Again farewell, and live happy!  Amen.
                Yours,
                  RICHARD HILLES.

LETTER CXI.RICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Sept. 2, 1543
  Praise to God!  Health in the Lord, my most esteemed master and brother in Christ, our hope.  I send herewith to your piety ten Italian crowns, which I desire to be laid out according to your pleasure, as occasion may offer, upon the poor exiles, (rich however in Christ,) and those especially, if such there be, who are in distress among you.
  My wife is expecting shortly, that is, in three weeks, her time of confinement, and earnestly entreats both you and your wife to commend her in your prayers to the Lord, whose strength is made perfect in weakness.
  At our last fair I gave the four florins for your books to Henry Falckner, to whom I pray you to commend me, and to tell him, that although he most solemnly promised me that he would take care that I should be paid all the money that he owed me at this Frankfort fair, (amounting to about one hundred and twenty-four crowns,) in golden ducats, yet that I have not received above four from master Christopher, but in other money as usual, which he most honestly paid me.  But the case was this.  Henry Falckner at first agreed to give me one hundred and seventy-five florins at our Strasburgh fair.  He then requested me to extend the time of payment till the Frankfort fair, when he would pay the whole in golden ducats, as appears from his note, written with his own hand.  I agreed to this, on condition that he would keep his promise, as a merchant ought to do.  He told me that he could get a large profit with those one hundred and seventy-five florins by the purchase of arraas and merchandise of that kind.  But I am sustaining this inconvenience from this business, that had I sent those ducats from the Strasburgh fair, together with the rest of the money I then had, fresh cloth would have been bought in England with that money before this time; whereas, too, in this city of Strasburgh I could soon have bought among my friends, with those one hundred and seventy-five florins which Falckner ought to have paid me in ready cash, golden crowns for twenty-three batzen, I was obliged at Frankfort to give a Jew twenty-three batzen and a quarter:  so that I lost two florins, besides the interest of money.  But I hope that another time he will perform what he has promised.
  I have no leisure to write more, except that our king has within these two months, as I wrote to John Burcher, burnt three godly men in one day.  For in the month of July he married the widow of a certain nobleman, of the name of Latimer; and he is always wont to celebrate his nuptials by some wickedness of this kind.  Farewell in Christ!
            Yours, Rych. H.
              [RICHARD HILLES.]
  P. S.  I pray you to give, together with these letters addressed to Germans, ten other French crowns and my other letter, to John Burcher.

LETTER CXII. RICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Nov. 15, 1543
  Health and peace from Christ our hope!  You must know, reverend sir, that, according to what you told me in your letter of the 13th of October, Henry Falckner wrote to me shortly after, to inquire about the price of my cloth.  I send you my answer to him enclosed in this letter, and request you will kindly explain it to him at your leisure.  You will thereby do me an acceptable service: for, as you are aware, I cannot write Latin sufficiently; and as to Germans, I am still more ignorant, for I cannot yet master the idiom of your language.  But to return to my subject.   If master Falckner (after you have explained my mind to him from my letter, or procured some one else to do so) should return my cloth to you, I pray you, my master, to take charge of it, and keep it in your house till the arrival of John Burcher, to whom I will write my mind respecting it, as to what he should do with it.  For in good truth I cannot part with it for a less sum, as times now are, than what I stated to Falckner.  If I were solely intent upon gain, I could make more money by a thousand florins employed upon other wares, especially in this time of war, than I can by two thousand florins laid out upon cloth.  But I always have in mind what the apostle says, 1 Tim. vi. 17, respecting those who desire to be rich in this world.  I was never very anxious about those four florins which I sent you by Falckner from the fair; but I wrote about them, merely to know whether the letter of the young man who is in my house, and which I sent by Falckner at the same time with the money, had been delivered.  That letter treated of some ungodly laws enacted about that time by our parliament: if you have received that letter, it is well.  For this young man, whose name is Francis Warner, has often inquired of me whether it had arrived safe: I replied that I had no doubt of it, because we gave it in charge to Falckner.  My wife heartily wishes for you and your wife every happiness; and says she has no doubt but that God helped her the sooner in her confinement by reason of your good prayers.  On the second of this month she brought forth to the church of Christ a son, who, as the women say, is quite large enough for a mother of tall stature, and whom I immediately named Geshom.  I am in daily expectation of a letter from England, but not of any news.  My wife very affectionately salutes above all others your most godly wife, and says that she wishes, I know not what, but that as she has already so many fine children herself, she would pray for the wife of master Megander, that she also may have a family.  Salute, I pray you, in my name all those learned men among you, to whom the church of Christ is so much indebted; and may our Lord Jesus, the chief Shepherd, recompense them all in that day, and especially yourself!  Amen.
              Yours,
                RICHARD HILLES.

LETTER CXIII. RICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Sept. 26, 1544
  Praise to God!  Health and peace from the Lord!  Your letter, my reverend and very dear friend in Christ, dated in the month of June, I received by Falckner at this our fair; and I offer my warmest thanks for your answer to Cochlæus’s book, of which you have made me a present: for I read it in the month of August, and it has confirmed me not a little in the true religion of our Lord and Savior.  I think myself too exceedingly obliged to your piety for having condescended to exhort me a second time in your last letter by Froschover, that I should so use the world, as not to lose heaven; that I should love the Lord God before and above all things, and not be to much immersed in perishable concerns, business, and money.  I now know that the love of Christ abides in you, because you keep his commandment, as it become a good shepherd.  “If thy brother,” saith the Lord, “sin against thee,” &c.  Doubt not, beloved master, but that the more you admonish me of my duty, or reprove me for neglect, the more I shall value and love you from my heart.  I confess that I am engaged in various, and perhaps too many, occupations; but, except at the Frankfort fairs, I am seldom absent from home.  And hence it is, that I apply myself to the reading of scripture less frequently than I could wish; because, having no servant, I transact almost all my business myself, especially here in Strasburgh, and I am almost always engaged in correspondence, settling my accounts, and things of the like nature.  Yet last winter, by God’s blessing.  I read the whole of the holy Bible which you gave me, besides the new Testament, with as much attention as I was able.  From this sacred reading, if I have derived no other advantage, I have at least learned this, that when the prophets, according to this your translation, intended to describe a knave or impostor, they called him a merchant.  I learn from hence, as you also say, what a dangerous and slippery thing is trade, in which occupation I may fall very soon, and I wish I may not have fallen very frequently.  Moreover, from that reading I learned repentance.  Do you, my master, aid me by your prayers as well as by your very godly and frequent and seasonable advice, by which you are truly, as you write, performing the part of a friend and brother, and are watching over my welfare: may God reward you for this in that day!  Amen.
  Furthermore, I received here from my wife, after my return, that book of yours which you lately sent me by Froschover; and as soon as I have any leisure, God willing, I will read it.  For it is much commended by those of our countrymen who favor the gospel, as our Michael (I mean Miles Coverdale) immediately after my arrival from England in these parts clothed it in an English dress; but I am more pleased with reading it in Latin.  For the same book I also return you many thanks; but am sorry that you should be always sending me presents, when I have here nothing worth sending to your kindness in return.  My wife also desires her thanks (as I doubt not but that you heard from Falckner) for that old medal representing concord.  If there is any news from England, our friend John, the bearer of this letter, will tell it you much better than I can describe it in this most barbarous and, as I fear, incongruous style.  The same person will bring you with him, enclosed in this my letter, twelve Italian crowns for the poor exiles.  I request you will distribute them, as you may have opportunity, at the beginning of the year; and pray the Lord for me, that he may mercifully regard this little offering, and have mercy on us all.  Amen!  Deign to salute in my name Theodore, Pellican, Megander, and your other pious and learned men.  My wife salutes you and your most amiable wife, whom I also beg you to salute in my name.  And may the Lord Jesus, our hope, grant you to make full proof of your ministry even to the end; that when the chief Shepherd shall appear, you may receive a crown of glory that fades not away!  Amen.
            Yours in the Lord,
              RICHARD HILLES.

LETTER CXIV. RICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
April 15, 1545
  Praise to God!  Health in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ!  Although I never doubted of your love to every member of Christ, and have often experienced your especial kindness to myself, you nevertheless do not cease to make it every day more apparent by your presents; which indeed are so far most gratifying to me, inasmuch as they are the manifestations of that regard towards me, which it has ever been my earnest desire that you should entertain:  they have however been less acceptable, because I would wish rather to spare you any expense in this respect, and especially since I know of no way of returning the obligation; and if I did, your kindness would not allow me to do so.  But of these things at another time; it seems best now to come to the chief subject of this letter.
  My countryman, John Burcher, has lately informed me by letter, that he is exceedingly desirous of obtaining the freedom of your canton; which however, according to the laudable custom and law of your city, he is prevented from obtaining, until he can produce a testimonial signed by some persons worthy of credit, to show that he was born in lawful wedlock, and that he has not fled from his country by reason of any crime against the state; but rather for having embraced the pure and Christian doctrine, and freely made a profession of it.  But now, since it would be too great an expense to send to England for a testimonial of this kind, and since also John Burcher feels quite confident that the testimonials of any persons of approved credit and probity, resident in these quarters, respecting him will be favorably received by the magistracy of Zurich, (according to the kindness by which they are distinguished;) he has requested me to obtain for him the testimonials of at least two Englishmen of sufficiently know reputation and piety.  One of them is named William Swerder, a gentleman, in whom with zeal for learning are united piety and sobriety of life.  The other I think is somewhat known to you, both by my commendation, and also by his own letters sent to you some time since.  He is called Miles Coverdale, and is truly one who is very dear to and honorably esteemed by all the ministers of the word, and other learned men in these parts.  He is the master of a grammar school at Bergzabern, a town not far from Weissemburg, where, by translating in his leisure hours, for the sake of the more extensive advancement of the kingdom of Christ, various religious works into our language, partly yours, and partly those of other learned men, he is of very great service in promoting the scriptural benefit of those persons in the lower ranks of life, who are anxious for the truth, and inflamed with zeal and desire of obeying the will of God.  He is one of those who, after the example of Moses, rather choose to be banished, and suffer affliction with the people of God, than with a wounded conscience to enjoy the pleasures of sin in their native Egypt.  But that I may dismiss this subject in few words, and reduce it into a narrow compass; since, I say, this John Burcher has not very long since written to me, and not only that, but another Englishman also, of approved character, has borne testimony to the above named William and Miles, that they can, if they choose, bring sufficient evidence that it was only for the sake of true religion, and for no other reason, that John was compelled to abandon the excellent prospects which he had in England before he came into Switzerland, where, as is not altogether unknown to you, he has been seeking to maintain himself by manual labor; I called upon William Swerder, who is now on business at Strasburgh, to ask him that, as it is well known to him that John Burcher is a man of spotless character, and suffering, as I before stated, for the sake of the gospel, he would not refuse to confirm that testimony respecting John with his signature, which you perceive he has done.
  But since the same Burcher has likewise entreated me, that in my journey either to or from Frankfort I would procure a similar testimony from Miles Coverdale at Bergzabern, (and indeed a more ample one, as I am told by the bearer of this letter, that he is the best acquainted with him of all the English who are sojourning in Germany,) I could not in any way do this without great inconvenience.  For although I will not deny that Bergzabern is not much out of the high road from Strasburgh to Frankfort; yet, because on that side of the Rhine the journey is not so safe, to those especially who are supposed to have money about them, as through the territory of the Margrave of Baden, I have neglected to procure the testimonial of my brother Miles; and the less reluctantly, because I hope that you, by reason of your piety and benevolence to the afflicted people of Christ, will so commend to the mayor and most worshipful senate of your city the testimonial which I send with this letter, that they may consider it as sufficient, and receive Burcher into the number of their citizens.
  But now, as far as regards my testimony, I must confess that this person was entirely unknown to me before his departure from England; for the place where he was born is very far distant from my native place, that is to say, by an interval of seven or eight German miles.  This report however prevailed there concerning him, among those who are counted gospellers, and it also came to my ears when I was still residing in England, that he had not left the country for any other reason than because he was discovered to maintain the orthodox opinion concerning the eucharist; but that in other respects he always conducted himself with piety and sobriety, wherever he resided.  And indeed as he has never, since he has been personally known to me, given me any reason to think otherwise of him, so, in truth, it has never been my lot to hear from any person any thing in opposition to this character; although both in England, and also after I came to reside here, I have frequently heard him spoken of, and at times too, when, if there had been any thing to find fault with in him, a fit opportunity offered of doing so.  Moreover, I may be allowed to bear this additional testimony respecting him, that I have seen a long letter of his to the lord Cromwell, the king’s chief councilor, and one who at that time possessed the greatest authority with the king in England; in which letter he explained the whole cause of his banishment, and how unjustly he was treated by the sanguinary bishops and the ecclesiastical order: from which writing no other suspicion could possibly arise either to myself or any one else, than that he had suffered persecution only for the sake of the gospel, and not for any thing else, either a criminal offense, or the maintenance of any erroneous doctrine.  In fact, as I perfectly remember to be the case, the principal, and indeed the only scope of his appeal was to this effect, that since he had been in many ways so unjustly dealt with, as that the impious bishops were within a very little of passing sentence of death upon him, he [Cromwell[ would deign to obtain for him, through his influence with the king, that without denying the truth (for that he constantly declared he would not do) permission might be granted to him to return to England in safety from the fury of his enemies.  Hence therefore it is easy to conclude (and when I read it, it removed all doubt whatever from my mind), that he would never have employed so much diligence and pains, as it is evident he did, in the composition of that letter, in endeavoring to explain therein to a man placed in such a post of dignity and authority, as Cromwell was at that time, the entire cause of his banishment, if that persecution which he then endured for the profession of the truth, had not been the chief, nay, the only reason of his seeking refuge in your canton.
  Wherefore, my very dear master Bullinger, I entreat you by Christ, for whose sake doubtless he is now an exile, not only to aid him in this object of obtaining the freedom of your city, but to show yourself easy of access and kind to him in whatever other matters he may chance to need your assistance and faithful counsel.  And God, who, as you well know, and most truly teach, leaves no act of piety without recompence, will bestow upon you abundant mercy in the world to come.  And if in my turn I shall be able to oblige you by a service, of this kind towards any of your friends, I hope that you will not find me less willing and ready on my part, as our Lord Jesus Christ knows, who is our life and hope, and in whom I wish you all safety and every happiness, to the glory of his name and the welfare of your neighbors!  Amen.
  I know of no news from our country, except what the bearer of this letter can inform you of.  My wife most dutifully commends herself to you and to your most faithful wife; and she also thanks you for that godly prayer which in your late letter to me your poured forth to God on behalf of our little son Barnabas, and also for the Swiss shoes given to my Gershom.
  Salute, I pray you, in my name Theodore Bibliander, Pellican, Gaspar Megander, Erasmus Schmidt, and especially your friend Gualter, and the other learned men who have deserved so well of the church of God.  May almighty God very long preserve you all in safety to the glory of his name!  Amen.
          Yours,
            RICHARD HILLES.

LETTER CXV. RICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Jan. 28, 1546
  Praise to God!  Health and peace in the Lord!  As it is a long time since I have written to your piety,, it is not right for me longer to abstain from writing.  And first of all, I am exceedingly obliged to you, sir, for having deigned to send for my perusal, although not as a present, the books you last forwarded to me.  But since this is your pleasure, I receive them gratefully, and, the Lord willing, will soon finish reading what yet remains in them to be perused.  May God grant that I may be able to read them with great advantage, as you have published them with great labor, to the glory of God’s name, and the edification of his church!
  Lewis Lavater (I know not through what circumstance) did not remain with master Matthew Zolle, but, as he told me, is now with one master Marbach, whom I understand from your letter, dated in October, not to be one with whom the father of Lewis would like his son to have any intercourse.  You mention, as a reason, that Marbach is altogether a Lutheran: but this is no new thing among us, that any preacher should savor of Lutheranism, because almost all the preaches and lecturers here are chiefly imbibing and inculcating Lutheranism: so that either Luther has drawn them over into his error, or else, fascinated by the world, they pretend themselves to be Lutherans.  So that if we consider this, there is no occasion for your friend Lewis again to change his lodging; since he will have just such another, if he should lodge with any learned man in this place.  And as for myself, sir, there is indeed scarcely any one here, with whom I am acquainted, who takes boarders, with whom I should think him better placed than with master Matthew Zolle.  For I have not only heard him well spoken of by Gerard Frisius and others, but also by the scholars who board with him; among whom, however, I have known very few since I came to reside here.  I am prepared, and I made him the offer, that if Lewis should desire it of me, I would lay out money on your account for the youth’s tabling, either for a quarter or half a year.  Yet, as his father is a man of property, I think it will be no loss to him to pay down the sum beforehand to John Burcher, that I may be able to pay for him the same amount here afterwards.  For in truth I scarcely ever keep any money by me for a week together, but lay it out forthwith in merchandise.  Do not, I pray, be offended at my writing to you with such freedom; for I am only pointing out to your reverence the state of my affairs, as to the employment of money.  Meanwhile, however, I will by no means refuse to lay down the sum here, before I receive it from you by John Burcher, although the amount should be three times as much as I think it will be.
  If there is any news here, or from England, you will learn it by the letter of a certain countryman of mine who is studying here, whose name is John Hoper, formerly in the court of our king, but now a disciple of Christ, the King of kings, and glowing with zeal and piety, and most attached to your name among those of all other divines.  He was sick at my house, almost unto death; and when, to all appearance he was on the point of departure, he uttered the language and profession of a most godly Christian breast respecting the matter of the eucharist, and all the articles of the Christian faith, before many by-standers.  May the great and good God give him grace to persevere unto the end, that he may be saved!  Amen.
  When I first read your letter, I was grieved at the death of Megander; but now, when I look upon the condition of this world, and the happiness of those who die in Christ, I begin to praise God for him.  Meanwhile, however, may God repair the loss, which, as you write, the church of Zurich suffers by his departure.  John Burcher lately wrote me word, that either you or your pious wife had intended to send us a cheese against Christmas.  But I am glad you did not, for we have received more gifts and favors from you than we shall ever be able to return.  Wherefore be sparing, I pray you, sir, of your presents, and notwithstanding entertain no doubt of our regard towards you.  For we love you, as we have been wont to do, in the Lord.  My wife salutes you and your wife, as I also do, and likewise the widow, if she is still a widow, of Megander, and especially Pellican, Theodore Bibliander, and your beloved Gualter, as he deserves.  Farewell in Christ Jesus our Lord and hope, in whom live happily!  Amen.
            Yours,
              RICHARD HILLES.
  P.S.  Lewis tells me that he has agreed with master Marbach for board at thirty florins a year.  But he has doubtless himself informed you of this by letter long since.

LETTER CXVI. RICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
April 30, 1546
  Praise to God!  Health, and the peace of God which passes all understanding!  Your letter, my master, beloved in the Lord, dated on the first of this month, I have to-day received from your friend Lewis, who kept it for me until my return from Frankfort.  I cannot altogether acquit myself either of ingratitude or indolence, for not having as yet replied to your letter of February the sixth.  For that letter of yours was not, as you write with your accustomed kindness to plead my excuse, of such a nature as to require no answer; for I must confess that it was so full of godly and pious admonitions, and so necessary to me who am employed in so dangerous a calling (if indeed trade can be so called, as the world now conducts it), that if there were nothing else that might seem to require an answer, I ought at least to have returned you long since, on account of that letter, the thanks due to your kindness and Christian love.  But O unhappy  me! who am so overwhelmed with worldly business, as thus to neglect my duty to my father, and spiritual and godly physician.  I therefore entreat you, my master, honored in the Lord, that you will deign to persevere in praying for me (as I collect from all your later letters that you do) to the Lord Jesus Christ, that the thorns of riches may not so pierce me, as to call away my attention from the study of godliness, and meditation upon heavenly things: our life is indeed, as you say, short upon earth, and we die daily.  These things I have always before my eyes, whether at leisure or engaged in business, eating and drinking, yea, even in my dreams when I am asleep.  May the great and good God grand (and I hope he will grant it the sooner for your prayers), that I may not bear these things in mind, or in a manner desire death, because it is said to put an end to the cares and anxieties of this life, (by which we are continually harassed in heaping up and preserving riches,) rather than because I desire with the apostle to be dissolved and to be with Christ.  Thus in me the flesh oftentimes seeks its own, and not only the glory and life of Christ.  But I have not now leisure to write to you upon this subject as fully as I could wish.
  You will obtain information, as to the state of England, from the bearer of this letter, more fully and conveniently than I can write it.  Meanwhile, however, I would have you to know, that while those are alive who now hold the reins of government and authority, it is not probable that the gospel will be purely and seriously received there.  For the king, the leading men, and almost all the bishops of that nation, are altogether intent upon war.  They desire to retain the good-will of the emperor by every means in their power, and regard the simplicity of the protestants for the most part as idle folly, and court their friendship (provided only they may not be compelled to admit religion in the first place,) not, as I think, because they love them, but that they may have them partakers in the wars, and in the hatred with which they are regarded by the French.  As for an alliance with them, I believe they revolt from it on account of the free confession that they make of the truth.  But God who knows all things, knows whether I am deceived in this opinion, or not.  I wish I may be.  Moreover, the bishop of Winchester has very lately republished a book against Bucer, altogether full of bitterness and invective, in which he professes his contempt of him on every account, attacks his learning, and considers yours as the most impious of all.  What kind of a book this is, the bearer of this letter can inform you at length; for he has read it through at my house.
  Nothing else, but what you write, is to be expected from those unclean birds now assembled at Trent.  May God therefore grant, according to your prayer thereupon, that the antichrist, who is now wounded by the sword of the Spirit of the wrath of God, may be entirely destroyed by the coming of our Lord!  Amen.
  Meanwhile, I pray you, do not cease to admonish me as you are wont, as frequently as your necessary engagements will admit, and (as you think me to deserve it) to reprove and rebuke me, that by the grace of God I may continue sound in the faith even to the end, and have my confidence steadfast in that glorious and awful advent.
  I have not as yet advanced any money for our brother Lewis, but am at all times ready to obey your wishes or those of his father in this matter.  Your attached friend, master Hoper, is now in England, but will shortly return to us, God willing, and afterwards to you.  Let us pray our God to bring him back with success; for he desires, and indeed it is the only object of his present absence from us, to procure, if he can, some money, with which he may be able always to reside either here, or with you, in holiness and with a good conscience, far from the impurity of Babylon.  My wife prays for all happiness to your wife, and tells me that she has sent, by master Froschover, I know not what trifle for her acceptance.  We both of us thank you as much for the cheese about which you wrote, as if you had really sent it us.  Salute, I pray you, masters Bibliander, Pellican, Gualter, and all the rest of you who are very dear to me in the Lord.  And I regret, had not God so willed it, that I can no longer send any introductions or recommendations to master Erasmus; for Froschover tells me that he is dead.  Farewell in Christ, our only hope, and live always most happy in him!  Amen.
            Yours,
              R. HILLES.

LETTER CXVII. RICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Jan. 26, 1547
  Praise to God!  health and perseverance in the Lord Jesus Christ, our hope!  I now at last reply to your letters dated Oct. 28th and Dec. 4th.  And first of all, I owe you infinite thanks, my most esteemed master, for your condescension in presenting me with your Commentaries upon Luke, as you had before presented me with those upon the other evangelists and apostles.  I pray almighty God that I may be able continually to meditate upon them, and, as you exhort me, to devote the best part of my life uninterruptedly to the study of godliness and to good works.  And I entreat you to pray the Lord for me, that I may do this, and cleave to the Lord, even to the end.
  I told our brother Lavater what you commanded, or at least wished; and I doubt not but that he will always well employ his time here, and be diligent in learning; and my constant exhortation shall not be wanting to that effect.  I fear, lest, as you write, the time be at hand, when the Lord will visit our iniquities by a cruel war, and will give us over into the hands of our enemies for correction and punishment.  For I hear (though I hope it is not the case) that master de Buiren is now attempting to set up the mass at Frankfort in some of the churches, though in the mean time he permits those who wish to hear the gospel and follow the truth, to do so without hinderance.
  There has lately been, as I think John Burcher wrote you word, some change in England, and there will doubtless be one yet greater.  For England has now had for some years only one duke, namely, of Norfolk, whom, together with his son, the king committed to prison, for having, as they say, when he was in a declining state, endeavored to restore the pope’s supremacy; and I have lately heard (but I have not yet received a letter from that quarter), that both father and son have been beheaded, and that that spirit of godliness or rather of popery, the bishop of Winchester, has succeeded into their place, I mean the Tower of London.  God grant that all these things may be subservient to the glory of his name and the propagation of evangelical doctrine, as many of our friends think it will be!  And this may be the case, after God shall have visited the sins of this kingdom.  For the new queen and the earl of Hertford, who is the uncle of the prince, the king’s son, are well disposed to pious doctrine, and abominate the fond inventions of the papists.
  Salute Bibliander, Pellican, Gualter, and the rest who are known to me there, and especially your most pious wife, to whom also my wife desires to be commended.
  Farewell, and live always happy!
              Yours,
                RICHARD HILLES.

LETTER CXVIII. RICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Feb. 25, 1547
  I have no later news to tell you of, than that it is certain that our king in England died on the twenty-eighth of January; and that on the following Monday his only son was publicly proclaimed king, according to custom, throughout the country; and on last Sunday he was publicly crowned; which they write me word from England is all true.  The young king aforesaid is called Edward, the sixth of this name.
  About one or two weeks before the death of the aforementioned king Henry, he commanded, as some say, by his will, that the duke, who in this country is called the duke of Norfolk, together with his only son, who in England is called the earl of Surrey, should both of them be beheaded.  The government of England, according to the king’s will, which is also confirmed by the parliament or diet, is placed in the hands of sixteen persons, eight of whom, it is said, are bishops, until the young king be grown up.  The most distinguished of them, however, is not a bishop, but the king’s uncle, or his mother’s brother.  He is also appointed lord protector or governor of the king his nephew, and of the whole realm.  This said guardian of the king is called the earl of Hertford: he is not very favorable to the priests, and a great enemy to the pope of Rome.
  Now if I thought that you did not know it already, I would also tell you the news that was sent me on the fifteenth of this month from Erfurt; namely, that the elector of Saxony, after having laid siege to Leipsic for three weeks, with an army of thirty thousand men, composed both of cavalry and infantry, was unable to take the town, although he had bombarded it very severely, and had done much damage to the houses.  He was forced to retreat with his army, and is now five miles from Leipsic; at about four miles from which duke Maurice is encamped with his troops, with king Ferdinand and the Margrave of Colbach.  But on the duke of Saxony’s side are the king of Denmark, and the Saxon towns, Bremen, Hamburgh, Brunswick, with some others, so that both parties are considered equally strong; and if they do not shortly make peace, (as some hope they will,) a battle must ensue.  I have likewise received intelligence from Erfurt, that the kings of England and France sent ambassadors to Hamburgh, who have been there together ever since Christmas, with the elector of Saxony, and the diet of the Saxon towns above-mentioned.  The king of Denmark has also been with them; but what they have done or determined amongst themselves, time will show.  May Almighty God sometime bless us with a long and lasting peace!
          Your servant to command,
              RICHARD HILLES.
  P. S. Health in the Lord Jesus, our Savior and hope!  I would have informed you, my revered master, of the most certain intelligence which I have lately received from England, by an express letter from myself, unless, as is frequently the case, I had been so much engaged upon other business.  Meanwhile, however, that you may not be without any information from me, though upon matters which I think you must have heard from others some days since, I forward to your reverence this copy of a letter which I lately sent from Strasburgh to a fellow-countryman of mine now resident at Basle.  Commend me most affectionately to all your brother colleagues in the Lord, and to your godly wife, and also to the wife of John Burcher; and tell her that I have lately received a letter from Cologne, by which I learn that he arrived there safe with all his wares, with which he happily set sail for Dort in Holland about ten days since.  Farewell in the Lord.  Dated February 25, 1547, by yours,
            R. H.

LETTER CXIRICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
May 19, 1547
  Praise to God!  Health and peace in the Lord Jesus our Savior!  I would have you know, my most honored master, that I have received your most acceptable letter, dated two moths since; and I owe infinite obligations to your piety for thus keeping me in your remembrance, and so constantly exhorting me to an innocent and upright conduct, and the continual study of the holy scriptures.  But as I do not perceive any thing in this your letter which of necessity requires an answer, except that I ought to return you my thanks for that German book which I received together with it, and also for your having condescended to write to me concerning what the French king’s ambassador required of your townsmen, I have till now deferred my reply.  And I pray you not to be displeased at this; for I have scarce leisure to reply forthwith to the letters of all my correspondents without great inconvenience to myself.
  They state here as a certain fact, that the duke elector of Saxony has been taken prisoner by the emperor’s troops; and the various statements of those who bring this news, are so consistent, that it seems highly probable, and is universally believed to be the case.  I have lately, however, received intelligence from Cologne, (but I do not altogether believe it,) that this news was circulated in all quarters by a courier from Hesse, and in Hesse itself; but that the landgrave had discovered that the report was false respecting the capture of the duke, and had in consequence severely punished at Marpurg, as he deserved, the messenger who first spread the report, and who declared himself to have been present at the battle, when the elector was taken prisoner.  But in the same t was stated that a letter had been written from Erfurt, on the first of May, to an inhabitant of Cologne, by name John Pelmke zum Rynberch, to the following effect:
  “As to our own affairs, very dear friend, I have to inform you that the emperor’s troops made an unexpected attack, as it were by forced marches, upon the army of the duke of Saxony, on the 14th of April; and that there fell on the duke’s side two thousand infantry, and one hundred and fifty cavalry; and that the son of the elector was severely wounded, but escaped with his life.  It was also generally reported at that time that the duke himself was slain; but he was found upon the ground unhurt, to the great joy of the whole army.  Moreover, it is stated that on the 25th of April a certain gentleman, named William Thunsern, fell upon the forces of the emperor with some thousand men from Bohemia, and took from them fifteen pieces of artillery, together with some wagons laden with silver, which had before been taken from the troops of the duke of Saxony; and that on the emperor’s side there fell five thousand men; so that he himself was forced to retire towards Egra,” &c.
  But I look upon all these things as fabulous.  I have no news from England, except what I wrote to John Burcher about a month since.  Farewell, and commend us to all your godly colleagues, and also to your faithful wife.
            Yours,
              RICHARD HILLES.

LETTER CXRICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
June 18, 1548
  Praise to God!  Much health.  You must know, my very dear friend and master, that I have at last received a third letter from you since my return from my native land; one too, which, besides many other things contained in it, abounds in holy exhortations to patience and perseverance, and every kind of virtue.  I return you for it my warmest thanks, and pray our good and gracious God to enable me to practice what you have so properly recommended.
  In the first of the letters above-mentioned, you speak much of Josiah Simler, for whom at his baptism you undertook the office of sponsor.  I will most readily do for him, for you sake, what you request.  But I do not think it will answer to me to advance him in future any money, which is to be repaid yonder, after our friend John Burcher has left you; nor will there then remain any hope of procuring the bows.  If, however, you will receive from his father those fifteen florins which I was to send you for this year, for the purposes you know of, I will hand them over to his son here, and am ready to pay them whenever he thinks fit.  Should, however, the young man be in want of money, I will supply him, upon the condition that it shall be remitted hither from you by a trustworthy person.
  In your second letter you desire to know the circumstances of the most learned John a Lasco.  All that I know about his condition I have learned from a citizen of this place, to whom he wrote last autumn.  For he was then at Embden in Friesland, and in good health; but very much grieved and dejected on account of the present state of Germany.
  And now to come to your third and last letter.  The book which you have sent to the archbishop of Canterbury, I will undertake, shall ere long be safely delivered; but this can hardly be done before our fair in July, except by means of a courier on purpose, which would be very expensive: for I must give five kreutzers for every half-ounce, as far as Antwerp, in addition to the carriage from thence to the archbiship.  If it had been brought but an hour sooner, I could have sent it by a native of Antwerp, who was then at my house.
  It is most certain, God willing, that I intend to return to England with my wife and children at the next Frankfort autumn fair.  I thank you for your friendly prayers, that God may prosper our journey.  You desire, moreover, to know by what means, and through what persons you may be able to write to my countrymen during my absence.  Our common friend, John Burcher, will most readily forward my letters.  For we have agreed to carry on our business in partnership for two or three years, or even longer, should it seem expedient; and on this account he has purchased a convenient residence in this town, which he will begin to occupy as soon as he shall have returned from the next Frankfort fair.
  You may also most readily obtain information respecting the affairs of England through master John Hoper, as long as he shall remain with you.  To whom, and to his pious wife, I pray you commend me; as also to that most learned man, master Theodore, master Pellican, doctor Gesner, and the pious widow of Megander, together with your wife.  My wife heartily salutes all the above-named, but especially yourself and your wife.
  The last news I have received from England is to this effect; namely, that some persons had presumed to marry a second wife while the first was living, but divorced, and even to have two wives at once.  This liberty has been prohibited, as it ought to be, by a public proclamation of the king and council.  The chancellor too, as they call him, of the kingdom, in a speech delivered in the king’s name before the judges of the whole realm, warned them to take serious cognizance of the like offenders.  There are also papists who, by their false rumors, endeavor to excite the people against the king and nobles of the realm.  Their lies are to the effect that the king is intending to oppress the people by a new and unheard of kind of tax; namely, that when any person marries, he must pay half a crown to the king; and so in like manner for baptizing an infant, or burying the dead; with various lying surmises of the same kind.  Against these also he [the chancellor] inveighed most severely, warning the judges to put a stop to these falsehoods as soon as possible, and to punish the authors of these wicked errors.
  I received this speech, together with the proclamation, about the end of May, and sent it long since to my friend John Butler, that when he had read them both he might send them to master John Hoper, who might interpret them to you in Latin, as they are printed in English.
  Before sealing this letter, I have heard from England that the bishop of Winchester, doctor Edmund Redman, and another, named Robinson, have been summoned to London by the king’s council, I know not for what reason.  All the women and children are sent away from Boulogne; for there is some apprehension that the French are about to attack it.  The lord Cobham, however, the king of England’s deputy at Calais, has written to me within this month, that he does not think it at all probable that the French will feel disposed to contend with us this present year.  Besides, our people have a great deal of work upon their hands in Scotland.  They have lately taken there a certain town named Haddington, distant only about twelve English miles from Edinburgh, and the English are daily fortifying it, as also very many other fortresses in Scotland.  I commend you, your wife and children, in our only Savior and Redeemer.  Farewell, and long live happily in the Lord!  Amen.
              Yours from my heart,
                  RICHARD HILLES.

LETTER CXXI. RICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
June 4, 1549
  Praise to God!  Much health in the Lord!  You are surprised, as you write me word in your last letter, dated March 24th, that I have been able to refrain from writing to you since the day I left Germany, and especially since you have now written me a second letter.  But you will receive, you tell me, whatever excuse I may patch up for the discontinuance of our correspondence; if I do not write, that no excuse, however ingenious, will avail with you, &c.  I reply, my master and most honored friend, that I have not written to you all this time, because I have scarcely had leisure, since my return, to arrange and write about such affairs as I was necessarily obliged to complete.  For Germany did not very well agree with me, as the air was unfavorable, nay, even most inimical to my constitution, and the mode of living and wine of that country, and especially the stoves in winder, suited me but little better; so that now, since my return to England, especially from the month of February, my strength seems to be so exhausted, as that I have hardly any energy left me.  Wherefore, unless God should restore my health, of which there is no sign, I shall from henceforth write to you much less frequently than I have done these two years, and principally, because I am not in the habit of writing Latin (which is a most troublesome business to me) to any but yourself.  And I hope you will not take it ill, because you may as readily be informed respecting the state of the realm of England, the war in Scotland, and my own affairs, through masters John Butler and John Burcher, as by letters from myself.  In the mean time I admire your truly pious admonitions, and will diligently attend to what you so abundantly bring forward in your letter from holy scripture, as well the examples of the godly, as the threatenings of the Lord against the impious despisers of the divine word; and I will daily implore the great and good God in my prayers, not to lead me into temptation on account of my grievous past sins, but to deliver me from all evil.
  I return you many thanks for the two decades of your sermons, which I believe master John Hoper will here present me with in your name.  I much wish to send you some good thing from hence to return; but theological books are rarely printed in this country except in our vulgar tongue.  When I find any book of this kind worthy of perusal, I will send it to one of my countrymen in Germany for master John Butler, that he may interpret to you the substance of the work in Latin.  I have saluted in your name master Bartholomew Taheron; besides which you desired me moreover to exhort him to be faithful to the Lord, and to continue constant in the truth.  And he most certainly does so; for he is a truly pious man, and one who fears God.  He endeavored as far as he could, (for he was one of the burgesses in the last parliament,) that there should be no ambiguity in the reformation of the Lord’s supper; but it was not in his power to bring over his old fellow-citizens to his views.  Therefore, as master John Butler will more fully inform your reverence from my letter, we have an uniform celebration of the Eucharist throughout the whole kingdom, but after the manner of the Nuremberg churches and some of those in Saxony; for they do not yet feel inclined to adopt your rites respecting the administration of the sacraments.  Nor do I doubt but that master M. B. [Martin Bucer] and the other learned men from Germany and Italy, (who are here with the most reverend the archbishop of Canterbury, and are lecturing in the universities of this country,) teach, nay, exhort and persuade that there is no occasion for it, and perhaps even, that it is not becoming.  Thus our bishops and governors seem, for the present at least, to be acting rightly; while, for the preservation of the public peace, they afford no cause of offence to the Lutherans, pay attention to your very learned German divines, submit their judgment to them, and also retain some popish ceremonies.
  I can make no answer to your letter written Nov. 9, 1548, because you therein desire me to let you know, if possible, how the archbishop of Canterbury received your letter and your book.  For I have no such familiarity or intercourse with him, or with persons of his rank and authority, as to be acquainted with such matters; and I therefore pray you not to take it ill that I have not, during this whole year, given you any information on the subject.  Be kind enough to salute in my name all your fellow-ministers, and especially your wife and all your family.  My wife also salutes you much, as likewise your most chaste partner.  May the Lord Jesus preserve you for ever!  Amen.
        Yours,
          RICHARD HILLES.

LETTER CXXII. RICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
Nov. 17, 1549
  Praise to God!  Much health in the Lord!  It is only two days, my honored master, since I received your most courteous letter, dated August 31, together with a packet of letters for master John Hoper and certain other brethren and friends of yours, which I immediately delivered to those to whom they were directed by you.  To write a few words respecting my own letter, I owe in the first place many thanks to your kindness in continuing to exhort me to the duties of religion, and to caution me against the too great cares of this world.  And I must confess, that we ought to admonish each other in turn by mutual letters and discourses of this kind.  I hear with pleasure of the agreement between you and master John Calvin respecting the sacrament, and doubt not but that master Hoper will shortly allow me to read it.  I will deliver your salutations to master Bartholomew Traheron and master Bernardine with much pleasure at the earliest opportunity, and will pray them, as you desire, in your name, that although you had not at this time leisure for writing to them, they will not, on that account, omit their office of writing to you.  I gave your very kind salutation to my wife, who salutes your piety in return, and most cordially desires your advancement in sacred learning, to the glory of God and the edification of the church.  She has been afflicted with severe illness ever since the month of August, so that for a long time we all of us despaired of her life.  But the Lord liveth, who bringeth down and raiseth up; and he has now afforded her a little respite, so that we have begun to cherish some hopes of her, that she will shortly be better, and at length be restored to health.  To this end I pray you, and all your fellow-ministers and brethren yonder, earnestly, to entreat the Lord.  She was first afflicted for a long time by a suffocatio matricis, and then by fainting fits, which lasted occasionally for a whole week; and lastly, she is severely suffering with a quartan fever up to this very day.
  You will, I know, be informed as to the existing state of our kingdom by the letter of our very dear brother, John Burcher.  On the whole, we are hoping that Christ may yet remain with us, though but a month since it seemed to many that he was inclined to depart from us, even beyond sea.  But the strength of the Lord is perfected in weakness.  Salute Pellican, Bibliander, and your other friends with whom I am acquainted, and especially master Butler together with his wife, and your most pious partner.  And give, if you please, to master Butler the printed paper enclosed in this letter, that he may read it, and interpret it to you.  Farewell.  May the Lord Jesus long preserve you to us!  Amen.
          Yours,
            RICHARD HILLES.

LETTER CXXIII. RICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
June 25, 1550
  Praise to God!  Much health!  This day, my very dear master, I have delivered some letters of yours addressed to master John Hoper; and I doubt not but that, if there is occasion, he will shortly reply to them.  I have received the letter which was enclosed in one of John Burcher’s, addressed to me in this present month; for I have for a long time occasionally received most of your other letters through Burcher, and have taken care that they should be delivered, as soon as I conveniently could, to the persons to whom they were addressed: and you will always find me most ready to do the like, whenever occasion shall require.
  In the month of May last I received your letter, dated March 13th, together with a copy of the third decade, which you therein mention; and I feel exceedingly obliged to your piety for having thought fit thus to bear me in your remembrance.  I have not yet read the book itself; but the subjects which you therein promise to treat of, please me very much, and I am especially anxious to read what you have written respecting trade.  As I know you rejoice in the prosperity of England, I can assure you, that never before in our time has there been such hope of the advancement of the pure doctrine of the gospel, and of the complete subversion and rooting up of antichristian ceremonies and traditions; so that we are daily expecting some Balaams to preach the truth, and bless the people of God.  And it is reported that the bishop of Winchester will shortly be discharged from the Tower of London, where he has been detained for his obstinacy these two or three years, and will publicly assert the pure doctrine of Christ; with what mind, God knows, probably an unwilling one.  But, however this may be, we are all of us, who favor the gospel, rejoicing in the mean time, that Christ Jesus will be plainly preached.  But of these matters I have lately written more at length to master John Butler, whom I entreat you to salute in my name, together with his pious wife.
  As to what relates to your letters to others, or those of others to you, I will most willingly perform what you desire; and I have long since carefully cautioned the aforenamed Burcher respecting them.  And I doubt not but that he will willingly do as you desire, provided only that he can receive at Strasburgh the money which he will have to pay for the postage of such letters.
  My wife, who by the blessing of God is now recovered from a most severe illness, desires heartily to be commended to you and your most pious wife, and likewise to her, who was formerly the wife of master Megander, and to her other acquaintance yonder.  I doubt not but that the Lord, our heavenly Father, has heard the pious prayers of yourself and others on her behalf; for she was all but expiring on two or three alternate nights in the month of December last, when you wrote to me and others at this place.
  You write, that you are deprived of some pleasure, so long as I do not write to you, and that you are delighted with my letters.  Wherefore I now at last answer your letter, though I do not perceive any grounds from whence you could derive such gratification, excepting only that I occasionally write in haste concerning the hope which all godly persons entertain in this country respecting the advancement of the kingdom of God and of Christ.
  The reason of your letters having been sometimes so delayed in their delivery, and loitering so long on the road, is, that John Burcher hands them over, as occasion offers, to the seamen at Strasburgh, and also to the wagoners and carriers who convey merchandise by the Rhine to Antwerp.  And this he especially does, when the packets of letters are of any great size; otherwise he would be obliged to pay for every ounce weight ten kreutzers to Spires, and not much less to Antwerp and London, if they were sent thither by the post.  For at Antwerp the post receives for the conveyance of a sheet of paper to London two stivers of Brabant, besides as much at London; that is, four stivers for a single sheet of paper.  But when we give our letters in charge to the merchants, we make them no payment whatever, either at the one place or the other.
  Masters Bernardine and Bartholomew Traheron salute you very much in return.  And I pray you, my master, to commend me to all yonder who wish me well, namely, to masters Gualter, Bibliander, Pellican, Zuinglius, Lewis Lavater, and the rest.  In what state are the affairs of master Hoper, who two months since was nominated by the king’s majesty to the bishoprick of Gloucester, you will doubtless learn from his own letters.  He perseveres, by the grace of God, to be a most constant asserter of the gospel; and he preaches every where with the greatest freedom agreeably to your orthodox doctrine in the matter of the eucharist.  He exhorts, yea, he persuades all.  For our people, as many as sincerely love the truth, have been always inclined to that opinion respecting the eucharist.  Your most amiable wife, I pray you, salute for me, in the Lord Jesus, whom I pray evermore to lead us in the way of truth!  Amen!  Farewell.
            Yours from my heart,
                R. H. Anglus.

LETTER CXXIV. RICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
March 22, 1551
  Praise to God!  Much health!  I have received to-day, my most honored master, together with your letter dated the twenty-fourth of last February, one from you to the wife of master John Hoper, to whom I forthwith delivered the same.  As you so much desire me, in the letter aforesaid, to write you a full statement of his, namely, master John Hoper’s condition, I reply, that I have nothing to make known to your piety respecting his troubles, beyond what I wrote on the first of last February to our common friend, master John Butler, and which I have no doubt but that he has before now made you acquainted with.  But not, thanks to God! this same master Hoper is discharged from custody, and restored to his former condition.  Previously, however, he yielded up his opinion and judgment upon certain points which are here regarded by us as matters of indifference.  And this Lent, habited in the scarlet episcopal gown, after he had been initiated or consecrated after the manner of our bishops, he preached before the king’s majesty; many of the [bystanders] either approving or condemning his dress, just as they were guided by their feelings.  Master Hoper is now gone to Gloucester, which is the seat of his bishoprick; but, as I hear, he will shortly return.  I grieve that the Germans have, in great part, gone over to the council of Trent.  But I think our countrymen, by the grace of God, are so firm and rooted in the truth, and especially in those articles which make against the primacy of the bishop of Rome, that they will never, at least in our time, give in their adhesion to this same Tridentine council.
  In your letter to me of the twentieth of August you relate good news from Italy, that she is beginning to receive the gospel.  May God increase in those who live there faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and may he perfect unto the day of Christ the good work that he has begun in some of them!  Amen.
  I have to thank you very much for your present of the decades of your sermons.  I cannot easily recompense this kindness.  But I will certainly requite you in some measure, when opportunity shall offer, both for those three or four decades, as also for the many other books which you have long since presented me with.  Salute, I pray you, in my  name, your most excellent wife, together with my other friends yonder.  My wife salutes you, and all yours, especially your wife.  Fare well in the Lord our Savior Jesus Christ!
            Yours,
                R. H.

LETTER CXXV. RICHARD HILLES TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
July 9, 1553
  Praise to God!  Much health!  Yesterday, my faithful and very dear friend, the lord mayor, with some of the aldermen and merchants, citizens of London, were summoned to the king’s palace at Greenwich, on the banks of the river Thames, and about a German mile from the city.  When they arrived there, in the presence of the king’s most honorable councilors, the lord treasurer, the president of the same council, addressed them to this effect, namely, that our very pious and holy king Edward VI. (who has now departed from this world and valley of tears, and, his earthly tabernacle being dissolved, is now, I doubt not, in the enjoyment of his eternal mansion in heaven,) bearing in mind that, mighty sovereign as he was, he was nevertheless subject to death, and the rather, because he had lately been weak and in bad health; studying too, not a little, that this English nation might be ruled and governed after his deprture in tranquility and peace; and considering that both his sisters (of whom the elder, Mary, is ill-disposed to the pure doctrine of the gospel) have been, by certain statutes enacted by authority of parliament in the reign of his father, declared illegitimate, as born of an unlawful marriage; earnestly required his honorable councilors to agree among themselves, in case the Lord should take his majesty from them, to admit, and account for his lawful heir and successor, the son of the lady Frances, now duchess of Suffolk, (provided she have a son during the king’s life-time,) who is the daughter of the lady Mary, the aunt of his majesty, and formerly queen of France; and afterwards the lady Jane, a truly learned and pious lady, who has this very year married the lord Guilford, youngest son of the duke of Northumberland, provided the said lady Frances have no lawful male issue during the life-time of king Edward.  He stated, moreover, that all the king’s honorable councilors, together with nearly all the chief nobility of the realm, had faithfully promised and bound themselves by oath and manual subscription to a writing to the same effect, that they would accomplish and perfect this arrangement, conceived by the king’s majesty during his illness.  Wherefore they desired the lord mayor and aldermen of London to be in like manner conformable, and to sign this document, which they readily did.  So that, though Almighty God, in punishment of our heinous sins, has taken away from us the most holy prince Edward our sovereign, concerning whom all persons who have ever known his majesty state, that they never saw a more excellent or more godly mind in any mortal body; yet we are not altogether without his mercy, since he has now ordained such a successor to so pious a king, under whom we have great hopes (for, praised be the Lord, we do not see any thing to prevent it) that we, her subjects, shall nevertheless be able to live a godly, quiet, and tranquil life, in all peace, virtue, and righteousness; and that the pure word of God will always be sincerely preached in this realm, and the true doctrine of the gospel maintained to the great comfort of all believers who dwell here, which may the Lord Almighty grant!  Amen.
  When I had written thus far, my honored friend in the Lord, the 10th of July arrives, when it is publicly proclaimed here, in the name of the aforesaid lady Jane, now queen of England, that the aforesaid king Edward is dead, that the lady Frances aforesaid, the queen’s mother, had no son, and therefore, as I understand, that the government of this realm has devolved upon this queen Jane, to which event may our good and gracious God grant his blessing!  Amen.
  I thank you very much for the little book you presented me with, and which I received together with your letter dated March the 10th, and I pray our good and gracious God, that, as you pray for me in that letter, I  may steadfastly persevere in faith and charity, and all good works, the unjust gains and sinful pleasures of this world being trodden under foot.  And if I can be of any service to you in forwarding your letters to your friends, I will faithfully and willingly use my best exertions to that effect.  You kindly consider it a great service, as I understand from what you have written, that I have caused your letters to be delivered to the parties to whom they were addressed.  But I do not consider myself as having any claims upon your acknowledgments for any service that I can render you, much less for one so trifling.
  My wife heartily salutes you and your wife, and wishes every happiness to you and to all your children.  Salute affectionately in my name master Pellican, and your son-in-law Lewis Lavater; and especially master Theodore Bibliander, and be pleased to tell him that I have delivered his two little books to master Cheke and master Hooper, as in his letter written in March he desired me to do.  And I return him my best thanks for having deigned to oblige me by such a present.  Salute too, I pray you, my very dear brother in Christ, master Butler, and let him know that I received in the month of June his letter dated May 18th, but have not now time to write an answer; nor indeed is there much occasion for me to do so, because I wrote very fully respecting all that required an answer, in my former letter.  Farewell and happily!
            Yours wholly,
              RICHARD HILLES.

LETTER CXXVI. JOHN AYLMER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Bradgate
May 29, 1551
  Since we are accustomed, most accomplished sir, to regard any favors conferred upon our friends as extending also to ourselves, I must consider myself on many accounts exceedingly indebted to your kindness; and first of all, for your having so studiously and diligently exerted yourself to instruct the family of our most noble marquis by your very learned works, and by your excellent advice to retain them in the true religion.  For, believe me, the letters of that holy man Bucer, whom when alive we reverenced as a father, and the remembrance of whom, now that he is no more, we most constantly retain as of a messenger of God; and also your own letters, which you sent to my most noble patron, were of great use both to confirm his steadfastness in the religion we had embraced, and also to rouse and stir up the minds of those who had begun to be either inactive through length of time, or fastidious through weariness of the subject in which we profess an interest, or careless through levity and fickleness of disposition.  For they always thought it right to submit to your authority, and to follow your important admonitions.  And as to myself, whenever my lord placed in my hands either Bucer’s letters, or your own, (and he always received them from both of you with the greatest satisfaction,) I used to consider myself as highly favored in being the guardian of such valued treasures.  For as often as I read them over, I seemed to myself to hold converse with the two most precious lights of the church of Christ.  In the next place, the singular regard you entertain towards my pupil, compels me to declare my respect for you, if in no other way, at least by letter.  For what favor more useful to herself, or gratifying to the marquis, or acceptable to me, can possibly be afforded her, not only by you, but also by any other person of equal learning and piety, than that she, whom her father loves as a daughter, and whom I look upon with affection as a pupil, may derive such maxims of conduct from your godly breast, as may assist her towards living well and happily?  And you are well able to determine, in your wisdom, how useful are the counsels of the aged to guide and direct young persons at her time of life, which is just fourteen.  For at that age, as the comic poet tells us, all people are inclined to follow their own ways, and by the attractiveness of the objects, and the corruption of nature, are more easily carried headlong unto pleasure, which Plato calls the bait of mischief, then induced to follow those studies which are attended with the praise of virtue.  In proportion therefore as the present age teems with many disorders, must more careful and discreet physicians be sought for; that the diligence, and labor, and exertion of excellent men may either remove or correct such evils as are implanted by the corruption of nature, and the infirmity of youth: for as we feed off the too luxuriant crops, and provide bridles for restive horses, so to these tender minds there should neither be wanting the counsel of the aged, nor the authority of men of grave and influential character.  You have acted therefore with much kindness in administering to the improvement of this young lady; and if you will proceed in the same course, you will afford great benefit to herself, and gratification to her father.
  Your singular regard for my pupil, as well as the importunity of that excellent and talented youth, John ab Ulmis, had induced me to write thus much to your reverence.  I was indeed afraid to interrupt so learned an individual, and one so diligently employed in the vineyard of Christ; but as he pertinaciously urged me, and assured me of your incredible kindness, I have banished all shame and fear from my mind.  Receive this, therefore, I pray you, with kindness and complacency; and if I have erred in any way, impute it to my affection for you, and to the importunity of my friend.  Farewell, most reverend sir, and pardon this extempore effusion.  May God, for the sake of the church, extend your years to those of Nestor!
            Your excellence’s most devoted,
                  J. AYLMER.

LETTER CXXVII. JOHN AYLMER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
Dec. 23, 1551
  Grace and peace in the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior, and a life of blessedness in him, &c.
  I have received, most worthy sir, your letter, abounding not only in affection and kindness, but also in true godliness and piety, wherein you describe me as highly favored in two respects; both in having such a pupil whom God has thought fit to adorn with so many excellent gifts, and because her family is one that is both well disposed to good learning, and sincerely favorable to religion.  In this respect, excellent sir, I agree with you, that for these reasons I may be accounted to have attained such happiness as falls to the lot of man; but I consider myself far more favored in having formed a friendship with you, and which God, who searches all hearts, knows how greatly I value.  It has always indeed been my disposition not only to set the highest esteem upon all kinds of learning, but to regard with the greatest affection those who cultivate and profess it.  For I well know how brutish this life of ours would be, were not the understanding of mankind cultivated by useful learning and liberal pursuits.  And while I have much delight in all these, I am yet ravished by my fondness for theology, and am often lost in admiration of it; so that I give more honor to its professors than to any other class of mankind soever.  For there flows forth from such persons, as from the purest fountains, all godliness, knowledge of religion, and innocency of life.  All good men confide in the teaching of such, and approve their sayings as the most holy oracles of God.  Hence faith towards God is acquired, charity is imparted, hope is increased, and in fine, all things that appertain to Christianity have their origin.  Since then the Lord has so abundantly heaped his riches upon you, as that you are in a position not only to inform your own mind, but to be a teacher and guide in the church to those who would otherwise err; it is our duty to love and reverence and look up to you, both for his sake who has been so gracious to you, and also for your own.  For thus does St. Paul exhort us in these words, ‘Let a man so account of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God,” &c. 1 Cor. iv. 1]; and in another place, ‘Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor:” 1 Tim. v. 17] whence we are taught to pay no less honor and respect to the ministers of Christ, than to those who, previously taught of God themselves, treat of, deliver, and explain, the most sacred mysteries of faith and salvation.
  It now remains for me to request that, with the kindness we have so long experienced, you will instruct my pupil in your next letter as to what embellishment and adornment of person is becoming in young women professing godliness.  In treating upon this subject, you may bring forward the example of our king’s sister, the princess Elizabeth, who goes clad in every respect as becomes a young maiden; and yet no one is induced by the example of so illustrious a lady, and in so much gospel light, to lay aside, much less look down upon, gold, jewels, and braidings of the hair.  They hear preachers declaim against these things, but yet no one amends her life.  Moreover, I wish you would prescribe to her the length of time she may properly devote to the study of music.  For in this respect also people err beyond measure in this country, while their whole labor is undertaken, and exertions made, for the sake of ostentation.  If you will handle these points at some length, there will probably, through your influence, be some accession to the ranks of virtue.
  Farewell, most illustrious sir, and may the supremely great and good God grant you a long life!  London.  From the house of the duke of Suffolk, late marquis [of Dorset].  Dec. 23
            Your reverence’s most devoted,
                JOHN AYLMER.

LETTER CXXVIII. JAMES HADDON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Bradgate, near Leicester
May 29, 1551
  Heartily wishing you health from the Lord!  Though no correspondence, most illustrious sir, has ever taken place between us, nor have I even seen you in person; yet I seem to myself to be acquainted with you, both from your published writings, and also from your letters to my patron the marquis of Dorset; and especially too, from the conversation and discourse had concerning you with John ab Ulmis, a godly youth, and one much attached to you, who has at length almost compelled me after long delay, and at first almost reluctant, to write somewhat to you.  If therefore I have been to blame by this freedom and extemporaneous effusion, and, to speak plainly, this trifling address, I beg you to lay the fault upon him; though I must candidly confess that, from a desire of a more intimate acquaintance with you, I am in some measure implicated therein myself.  May the Lord Jesus evermore bless your ministry, and every way defend and guide you by his Spirit!  I hope that you remember me in your prayers to the Lord.  Bradgate,  near Leicester, May 29, 1551
            Your piety’s devoted,
                JAMES HADDON.

LETTER CXXIJAMES HADDON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
Dec. 28, 1551
  Much health in the Lord!  Your letter, I perceive, breathes the same spirit of benevolence that you are universally reported to possess.  Wherefore, although at this time no certain intelligence of any great importance presents itself, yet as I have met with a person by whom I can send a letter, I am unwilling to let him depart without one.  Your having received my former letter with so much kindness, I consider as an evidence of your regard for me; and you have now given me such encouragement, that if I write nothing of an important or serious character, I will at least write for the sake of establishing the correspondence we have now begun.  I conveyed your respects (as you desired me to do) to my patron, who is now duke of Suffolk, in such a way, that he has sent you a letter.  You can indeed confer no greater obligation upon his grace than by continuing (as you have once done already) to impart godly instruction to his daughter.  For, although she is so brought up, that there is the greatest hope of her advancement in godliness, yet your exhortations afford her encouragement, and at the same time have their due weight with her, either as proceeding from a stranger, or from so eminent a person as yourself.  You commend to me John ab Ulmis, with the rest of the Helvetians: I wish I could be of as much use to them as I desire.  But though God does not see fit to give me any power in this way at present, yet they shall always find my labor, diligence, and zeal ready to serve them, as far as I can, and especially John ab Ulmis, with whom I am acquainted, and whom I believe to be a young man of integrity and pure morals.  Farewell.  May Christ every way preserve you, and evermore bless your ministry!  Remember me, I pray you, in your prayers.  London, Dec. 28, 1551
            Your attached,
              JAMES HADDON.

LETTER CXXJAMES HADDON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Richmond, near London, 
August, 1552
  Health in the Lord, most honored father!  While I was thinking what I should best write to your reverence, in comes John ab Ulmis, and tells me that it would much gratify you to be informed either of the progress and establishment of religion among us, or respecting the management of the household of my patron the duke of Suffolk.  As to religion however, after the demolition and overthrow of the idols, and the weakening and downfall of idolatry, and after our approach to the true light of the gospel, by the blessing of God now restored, I think that you are not ignorant of the path we have entered, the measures we have adopted, and the order we have maintained for these four years past.  At this moment, however, it is reported, that the book, called the king’s book, in which is contained and explained the manner of divine worship and the mode of prayer to God, commonly set forth among us, (and to be used of all persons in public) is about to be amended in certain places; in what, however, and in how many, doth not yet appear.  There were certain prayers for the dead, which did not seem very convenient.  Moreover, in the celebration of the Lord’s supper there is something either to be altered or entirely expunged.  The book too, which is set forth concerning the election and ordination, as they call it, of ministers, seemed to contain some things which were partly absurd, and partly impious.  We are in the expectation, by God’s help, of their being amended, at least in some measure, if they do not reach the entire perfection they ought and should do, and which, however we may desire it, we cannot perhaps as yet fully hope for.  But, thank God, we are in great hopes that ungodly superstition will be entirely abolished.
  As to the regulations of the duke’s household, you are rather to be entreated of me again and again to point out the method that you think best yourself, than that I should explain to you our family arrangements, of which John ab Ulmis can give you a better account than I can.  There is one thing however, respecting which I will lay before you my sentiments and intentions, and on which too I shall request of you your own opinion and advice.  You are aware, that in the houses of our men of rank there are practiced not only such recreations as refresh both the body and mind after a moderate and godly manner, but such also as occasion sloth, and beget idleness and ungodliness: of this kind are games of cards and dice.  The duke has forbidden all his domestics to risk any money upon amusements of this sort; but yet he himself and his most honorable lady with their friends, not only claim permission to play in their private apartment, but also to play for money.  As to myself, however, I am of opinion that I can nowise admit it to be allowable for a Christian so to risk his money at any game whatsoever, as to leave off as a winner, with some pecuniary advantage, or else as a loser, to his pecuniary loss.  And the matter is frequently discussed in this way.  Those who are on their side bring forward for the most part these principal arguments, that they do not wish for another person’s money, but that it is the same thing to them whether they win or lose; that the game loses all its interest without a stake, so that its sleepy character, as it were, must be awakened; that no one feels any excitement, unless there be a stake laid down; that in many other things there are superfluous and unnecessary expenses, as in diet, and clothes, &c.  Wherefore, in this respect also, we must yield somewhat to fashion, and not act with so much strictness, or bring every thing to the test of conscience and of duty, since no one can live entirely without faults of some kind; with much more to the same effect.  It is therefore lawful to hazard a small amount, only the risk must not be excessive.  I tell them, on the other hand, that I cannot be brought to believe that the human mind is so equable and indifferent in matters of chance, as not to regard gain more than loss, or to avoid loss rather than gain.  Were it not so, gaming would not be a risking of money, but rather a constant inclination to be generous.  Besides, if any one possesses so even a temper, he will then act very blameably in endeavoring to destroy this equanimity and to expose himself to the inconsistency, by introducing a stake, of incurring the danger of exciting the calm and heretofore settled and quiet affections (if indeed they can be such, which I do not believe), whence there forthwith arises the coveting of another’s property, anger, envying, strife, &c.  Let the game then be cold and lifeless, and (lest it should become worse) let the act of playing itself, which is, or ought to be, the chief motive, be a sufficient reward in any kind of game, and the prize, if it seems fit, be as it were a garland of praise.  If a person cannot be sufficiently induced and excited by these motives, it comes of evil, which is an additional argument.  But the case is different in public games, which have their certain appointed prizes for the sake of exercise, and of a contest in other respects laudable and necessary, and for the good of the state.  As to what may be superfluous in food or clothing, if one’s table be too exquisite and redundant, and one’s dress too gaudy and expensive, or in any other respect beyond what is necessary, this is a voluntary superfluity and a self-sought sin.  Besides too, there is a great difference between money risked without any necessity, and an expense of this kind, which is in some measure necessary, because the ends are different.  For clothes and other ornaments are made and wrought for the very end and purpose of being used and worn out by some persons or other.  The fault consists only in their being over abundant, and superfluous beyond what is proper, and when their cost is disproportioned to the rank of the wearer.  The same judgment must be given too with respect to diet, except only that its use is more necessary.  But money is intended for use, and by the sanction of law, as a standard of value for the property of mankind, as Aristotle has admirably shown both in his Ethics and politics.  Moreover, we must of necessity have some clothing or other: to risk money at play is not necessary, because games are of themselves an exercise without any stakes being produced.  And though moderation ought to be observed both in dress and diet, according to the distinctions of rank, yet it is not so in gaming.  For it is equally an offense towards God in all persons, inasmuch as by all persons the money might be applied to better and more necessary uses.  And because, by reason of our innate corruption, we are always prone to evil, and even when we purpose rightly, unless God assist us by his grace, our very purpose ends in sin; yet, though notwithstanding the greatest possible diligence no one lives without sin, we must not seek after premeditated opportunities of committing sin or of acting wrong, and allow ourselves in them; and it is very inconsistent with Christian piety to do so.  It is not therefore allowable to risk the smallest sum for the purpose of gain, and in such a way as that loss may hence accrue to any one; for, however small may be the amount, if it be only a penny, it may be employed to better purposes.  And there is no reason why money should be introduced, if not for the sake of covetousness, or at least of gain, since play is play of itself, without a single farthing being played for, &c.  In this manner and to this effect the dispute is often carried on.
  I am much influenced too by the fact, that I perceive gain of this kind is not approved in any well-ordered form of government.  That it is allowed by some of the schoolmen seems to me too trivial, not to say, absurd; though indeed all the sounder writers altogether condemn it, if it is for the sake of lucre, or exceeds the expense of a dinner, or something of the kind, whence no harm can arise, but rather much advantage from the mutual good will and kind feeling which accompanies such entertainments; and when both parties have agreed beforehand as to the expense, so that a stated sum may be laid out.  But the expense attendant upon gaming is by no means necessary, and depends upon the mere fickleness of fortune.  And you know far better than I can tell you, how much the civil laws forbid things of this kind, and how the right of recovery becomes void.  With us, however, a wager won at archery may be recovered by law, and an action may be brought by the winner against the loser, just as in the case of those contracts which are sanctioned both by the civil law, and our common law and acts of parliament.
  You now perceive my boldness, in that, for fear of writing nothing at all, I have troubled your reverence with these trifles.  But however, these light matters, and as some may think them, ridiculous, sometimes occasion great and serious mischief by the losses caused and sustained, to say nothing of other evils that have occurred.  Indeed, I always consider them as matters of serious importance.  For whatever is wasted in this way, (for I must call it by that term,) however trifling in amount, might nevertheless be applied to far better and more useful purposes.  I daily see many evils arise from this practice, and not one advantage.  And although these evils are not necessarily connected with the thing itself, because all persons do not thus abuse it; yet I perceive that games of hazard are almost always attended with this mischief, that the shadow follows the substance.  And so much for my opinion.
  As to my purpose, it is this.  I bear with it for the present, but in such a manner as to reprove it as often as a good opportunity presents itself; but this I do in private, or in conversation with a few, and not by openly preaching against it.  Once indeed I publicly denounced it from the pulpit, last Christmas, because at the very time, as you know, when we ought most of all others to sing praises to our most merciful Father, and rejoice in the Lord, people more especially amuse themselves by indulging in mummeries and wickedness of every kind; and rejoice together with the wicked, and are especially serving the devil, in imitation, as it seems, of the ancient Saturnalia, as you know better than I do.  I am not now speaking of the family in which I reside, for the case is not so with them; and I am quite ignorant how the case is with you, or in other places.  But with us, in general, throughout the whole country, (although not separately in the house of every individual,) at this time more especially, and at these holidays, we abound in examples of the worst and most abandoned character, and most inconsistent with our profession.  And the evil practice has become so prevalent, that unless people will make merry (as they call it) at these holidays, and merry too, in the worst possible way, or one at least of which they will be ashamed at the season of Lent, as they say, they not only consider them stupid and unfit for any thing, but it is almost a part of their religion to act in some measure in this way; and they fancy that they are merry after this fashion on account of the birth of our Lord.  This still prevails among the vulgar and the country folk, who are not yet instructed.  In our family, however, there is nothing of the kind, nor anything so greatly unbecoming, concerning which I shall say more presently.  But I have described to you the general practice through almost all England, except in a few particular places; and I explain it to you more fully, because John [ab Ulmis] told me that you would be gratified by my doing so.  If therefore I seem too verbose, you must lay the blame upon him, and excuse me.  To proceed therefore.  Although the nobility and greater part of the commonalty (now by the grace of God better instructed) plainly understand that it is not their duty so to conduct themselves, yet partly from the force of habit, and a desire not to appear stupid, and not good fellows, as they call it, but partly and principally, as I think, from their not having yet so far advanced as to be able perfectly to hate the garment spotted by the flesh, or to feel as yet the genuine fear of God implanted in their mind, they have no settled intention, much less any desire, to conquer and crucify themselves.
  But to return from this digression, and explain the reason why I once reproved my flock in my sermon, and what followed thereupon.  It is as follows.  When I had openly reproved the whole thing altogether, and those too, though in common and general terms, who played for money, I saw that it was taken in bad part, because in the household of the duke, my master, the domestics do not play, or at all events in no wise play for money, so as to be found out.  But since the duke himself and his lady have secretly played with their friends in their private apartment, they thought it was my duty merely to have admonished them in private.  But you must hear the reason of my acting as I did.  For this open rebuke was not immediately administered by me at first but long after; and in the manner, and with the consideration and caution that I shall now state.  When I had frequently done this, and, as I perceived, without any effect, although they had nothing to say against it with any show of reason; and having forewarned them that I would at length sometime or other plainly and openly reprove them, if they should repeat the practice of playing in their apartments, provided they played for money, (for that otherwise I had no fault to find with their playing, as an exercise both of mind and body; but that I could no longer put up with that kind of game, when they played for money, because I saw no sufficient reason adduced by them for that very unnecessary expense,) and having said very much to the same effect, they left off for a time: upon which I was very glad, and began to entertain great hopes.  Afterwards, however, on the Christmas following, when I perceived they were beginning to return to their old habits, I publicly reproved, as opportunity offered, both the thing itself, and those who practiced it, but in the way that I have above stated, that is, in general terms, without naming or describing any individual.  Understanding however that offence was taken at this, I was from thenceforth silent, contenting myself with a private and individual reproof, whenever the subject was brought forward in conversation.  And so far I put up with and allow the practice, that I do not reprove it publicly and in my sermons.  But since they consider me to strict, and under this pretense choose to be their own interpreters in other matters, contrary to what they have been accustomed; and say, “In this or that point Haddon cannot agree with us, though they are just as much matters of indifference as the play which hardly any one finds fault with but himself:” and they are thus advancing to what is really evil: lest, I say, they should err in that way, and go on by degrees into intolerable evil, I bear with this, as I have above explained, against my will.  I bear with it of compulsion, that I may gain them over in other things of greater importance; I bear with it, just as a man who is holding a wolf by the ears.  But I perceive some good arising from this concession, which in fact is no concession at all, but in some measure a remission of duty, or rather of strictness in the performance of it; because I do not find fault in public, although individually and in conversation I always reprove in the same way as heretofore.  But because they see that I in some measure yield to them, even against my own opinion, and consider that I deal tenderly with this infirmity of theirs, they are willing to hear and attend to me more readily in other respects.
  I have now explained, more fully perhaps than is consistent with your engagements, both my own opinion upon this subject, as also my purpose and manner of tolerating it.  I request that you will plainly write to me upon this matter, and fully state your own opinion respecting it, and how you think I ought to act: state what you approve, and what you disapprove, as far as it may seem good to you; and give me your advice as to how far you think I may concede in matters of this sort, and to what extent I may connive at them.  But do this at your leisure; for I should be unwilling to interrupt you when occupied in things of greater moment.  Unless I judged of you in some measure by myself, (as far as is allowable for so slender a scholar, and one who is but just beginning to learn,) to be a most accomplished and learned man, and one who is perfect in every kind of knowledge, I should not have dared to interrupt you in this way, whom I have scarcely saluted in these three letters.  But be this as it may, you are yourself to blame for having wished me to write.  I will carry my boldness a little further, and pray you to salute for me that most honored man master Bibliander, whom I seem to myself to be well acquainted with from his published works.  Farewell, ye two lights of the church.  May Christ protect you, and by his Spirit aid both you and your ministry!  Richmond, near London, August, 1552
            Your attached and most devoted,
                  JAMES HADDON.

LETTER CXXXI. JAMES HADDON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
unknown
October, 1552
  Greeting.  I have heretofore written you tolerably long letters; I now send you a short one, and the rather, as you tell me you are in a weak state of health.  I shall pass over the formal and almost courtier-like custom of returning you my thanks for having written to me, notwithstanding you were either actually indisposed, or at least a valetudinarian.  Your very short letter, most courteous and honored sir, was, you may be assured, exceedingly gratifying to me, not only because you seem entirely to agree with me, but also for the description of the beginning and progress, and the order now observed among you; all of which things I had a wonderful desire to know.  I have conferred with the duke, my master, respecting your friend Schmutz; and he promises, for your sake, to be exceedingly kind to him, and to bestow upon him the same pension as he formerly did on John ab Ulmis.  It will be necessary for you some time to recall this to his grace’s memory, as I am shortly about to leave his roof, having been summoned by the king’s majesty to undertake a certain office in the state, in which, though it is not very lucrative as to my individual benefit and emolument, I purpose to the utmost of my power to promote the gospel.  I am telling you this, that when you write about Alexander Schmutz, you may not address the duke as if I were with him, but as though I were absent, as I intend to be.  For though I shall not be able to be altogether and entirely separated from his grace, yet I shall be for the most part, as soon as I shall be able to discharge the debt already contracted, and yet to be contracted, for the payment of the first-fruits.  But it has pleased God to render his grace so much attached to me, and me too in my turn so devoted and attached to his grace, that I cannot entirely separate from him, but must occasionally visit him.  You can however yourself write more fully about Schmutz, or any one of the like sort whom you may wish to recommend to his grace, as supposing that I am not with him; and there is no doubt but that his excellency (such is his kindness towards yourself and those who are like you) will take it in good part.  I commend your health and your whole self to God.  I would willingly exhort you to preserve it as you can, and as you know you ought.  I earnestly pray you to salute master Bibliander in my name.  May God be with you by his Spirit, and with your ministry!
              Your attached,
                JAMES HADDON.

LETTER CXXXII. JAMES HADON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
Nov. 30, 1553
  I should have to write very much to your reverence, if I could indulge the feelings of my mind.  But by reason of the manifold engagements with which I am at present overwhelmed, I can scarcely write to you at all.  Indeed all that I have to say could not well be committed to writing, and the bearer John Schmutz will give you far better information in words.  Alas! what a severe loss have we sustained!  Alas! how true religion is banished!  Alas! how justly is the wrath of God stirred up against us!  I dare not write more; you must understand the rest.  We were not so much in the hope of restoring true religion, as we are now in fear of recalling impious and abominable idolatry.  Pour forth your prayers, I entreat you, for me and those like me.  A few individuals of this sort are compelled to afford their testimony to real godliness and religion.  All our leading men, I mean the bishops and persons of that sort, are overwhelmed by this calamity, and thrown into prison.  May God help us!  We also are speaking to no purpose, for unless God order it otherwise, it is already determined what is to be done: only that we may profess in whom we believe, and what religion we hold, we accepted an offer made us of encountering our enemies.  What will be the result, God knows, and whether this may not be the last letter that I shall be able to write to you.  I very much regret that I was unable so fully to provide for your friend Schmutz by means of the duke of Suffolk, as I hoped and expected, had not this event taken place, which I cannot relate without tears.  Pardon me therefore, if I do not write more upon the subject.  I doubt not but that the order, as it were, of the whole tragedy will be related to you.  The duke himself holds to the true God, and I hope by God’s help will fully retain his opinions about true religion, in opposition to the devil, whose agents are striving with all their might to lead his lordship astray: that he may do this more effectually, I commend his lordship to your prayers, and I commend too myself, and those likeminded.  Salute for me, I pray, master Bibliander.  May God be with you by his holy Spirit unto the end, and ever glorify his name by you, as he has hitherto done!  London, Nov. 30, 1553
              Yours most attached,
                JAMES HADDON.

LETTER CXXXIII. JAMES HADDON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
July 9, 1554
  I had intended to see your excellence, and deliver to you in person this letter written to you by  master Hooper.  But having met with some godly persons and brethren in the Lord, I cannot leave this place at present.  I have thought it therefore my duty not to retain by me any longer the letter of one who is so much attached to you.  I entrust it to Parkhurst, that brother in the Lord, who is able to give you as much information about our friend Hooper as almost any one else.  For they were most intimately united, as well by disposition as by vicinity of residence.  As for myself, I intend, by God’s assistance, to visit some time or other both yourself and the other distinguished men in your church.  Among whom salute, I pray you, for me the reverend father in Christ, master Pellican.  I am now writing to the worthy and excellent Bibliander to the same effect as I have written to you.  May God every way be with you, and preserve you for the benefit of his church!  Strasburgh, July 9, 1554
              Your attached,
                JAMES HADDON.

LETTER CXXXIV. JAMES HADDON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Aug. 31, 1554
  Much health.  I perceive in your letter to me, most honored sir, that of which I never doubted, namely, your grief for the downfall of the church of England, and your kindness and good-will towards men.  Of the former I will say nothing, lest the wound should break out afresh.  Of the latter, however, I can rather conceive in thought, than express in words, what I ought to say, because I know that you will not willingly hear it.  Passing over these things therefore, as to your wish that I should inform you respecting your friend Hooper, whether or not any letter of yours written to him will be safely conveyed, and delivered into his hands, I have not yet obtained any certain information upon this point; nor am I able to do so, for he writes word that he is now thrust down to the very lowest dungeon, and that his servant has been taken away from him.  Still there have been, as I hear, many ways and means devised, by which good men have communication with him, and he in turn with them.  Wherefore I have conferred here with one of his friends, who has promised to take care that your letter shall be sent to London, and given in charge to some godly person who, if he can deliver it safely, will do so; if not, it will remain in his keeping.  You will act therefore as you think best.  But your letter to him will doubtless afford him great comfort.  For this it is that he complains of, respecting many persons, that he cannot hear from them; and he almost thinks himself deserted by his friends, which (as you yourself know) is the greatest grief to persons in distress, and especially to those who are of a naturally benevolent and well-ordered mind.  And the word well I refer to teaching in general.  For we do not here lay aside our natural feelings, but seek for consolation in advesity elsewhere than from God alone.  But to seek it from those more especially, who approach nearest to God, that is, the godly, is not so remote from godliness, (since means are not to be rejected, especially when of a kindred character,) although we ought to depend upon God and his Spirit exclusively.  I need say no more to one of your wisdom and piety.  Whatever you may determine upon, if you wish for my assistance, you will find me entirely at your service.  Farewell very heartily in the Lord.  Strasburgh, Aug. 31, 1554
            Your most attached,
                JAMES HADDON.
  P. S. There is one Banks who has written to you about the lady Jane.  He has shown me your n answer to his, from which I infer that he wrote something to you which you did not deem it prudent to publish.  It is well that you came to this determination, and I beg of you by no means to make it public, or suffer many persons to copy it.  For although he wrote it without my knowledge, yet I know for certain that it will occasion the greatest danger to me, if it be published or appear in his name, because I brought him over from England, and he is with me as my friend.  If it were evident that all the statements were certainly true and proved, and that their publication would tend to the glory of God, I would then prepare myself to meet the danger.  But I am rather afraid that all the facts are not as described by him, but that he has gathered them from common report, and being himself too in some measure biased by his zeal.  Were the statement published, it would probably do more harm to the truth, and to our cause, than it would do them good; to say nothing of the certain risk and peril which would hang over others.  Nor could the whole account be defended with a sufficiently safe conscience, since, probably, some things have been stated as facts, which may not be found to be such.  But as to what regards the lady Jane herself, and what is said in her name, (as for instance, her exhortations to a certain apostate, and her discourse with Feckenham,) I believe, and partly know, that it is true, and did really proceed from herself.  It will now be sufficient for  me to have pointed out to your prudence, what you have already perceived of yourself, that is, that these things should not be published, and especially the other matters under any circumstances whatever, and I pray you again and again not to allow it.  Should it be thought expedient that they should come forth some time hence, this can be done whenever you may think fit; but the present time is most unsuitable for such a measure, even if it were certain that the whole statement is correct.  For we have too many matters of fact to make it necessary to collect mere rumors, and those perhaps altogether invented.  Our adversaries already partly lay this calumniously to our charge: what will they do if they have sufficient grounds of accusation?  Let me soon hear from you, that I may know you have received this, and that I may be assured that the letter neither is nor will be published.

LETTER CXXXV. JAMES HADDON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Dec. 9, 1554
  Much health.  As the letters of the absent are a kind of substitute for personal intercourse, I therefore write to you, most honored and kind sir, with much pleasure; and the rather, because I not only perceive your kindness towards me in your letter to me, but am also informed of your regard for me from the report of others; and not that merely, which you entertain towards all the members of Christ our Savior, but an especial regard arising from the leaning of your mind towards me, and which, I am told, you manifest by your frequent inquiries about me.  God be thanked, who had implanted in you this kind feeling!  I would give you news from England, if any good tidings were to arrive.  As to bad, there is nothing certainly known at present, and the bearer of this can inform you of what is reported better than I can.  In short, every thing seems to be declining, and getting worse and worse.  I could tell you a great deal about myself and my present condition, but I am unwilling to trouble your kindness with unnecessary details.  As to that Banks, however, about whom I wrote to you before, I have an earnest request to make of you on his behalf.  I have hitherto relieved his necessities out of my own slender means.  But now, owing to the calamities of the times and the fury of my enemies, I am stripped of almost all my property.  And they are so violent against me and those like me, that God only knows what else will follow.  To his will and providence I resign myself, as to that of a most kind and merciful Father; and I earnestly implore you to entreat the same with me and for me, that I may continue to do so even unto the end.  The reason of this rage of my adversaries is, I hear, the testimony openly given by me to the truth in that convocation held at London last year.  But in the mean time they have been seeking with the greatest possible diligence some other plausible pretext; and not being able to find one, they at length denounce me as a heretic on account of my freely declared opinion against their abominable doctrine of transubstantiation, &c.  I call it a freely declared opinion, not only because it was freely set forth by me, but also because that assembly ought to have been most free, as likewise the opinions which were therein advanced.  Concerning which the bearer of this, Chambers, my very dear brother in the Lord, can give you fuller information, as well as in what manner our adversaries, filled with the greatest hatred against the truth, acted in entire opposition to what is just and good, and against all laws, human and divine.
  But to return to Banks, he will think himself very well dealt with, if he can obtain a situation with some respectable and pious printer, as a reviser or corrector of the press.  And he hopes that this may be accomplished by your recommendation.  There is no need of commending him to your kindness with many eulogies, or of enlarging upon the ability which he possesses for such an employment.  He is well acquainted with Latin, as you can judge for yourself, and not unskilled in Greek; of peaceable disposition, glowing with true religion, and exceedingly devoted to literary pursuits.  In my opinion you will confer a benefit upon any one with whom you may be able to place him.  And yet, for Banks’s sake, I shall consider the favor in some measure conferred upon myself, because, as it appears, I can no loner support him at my expense, as I should wish, unless things turn out otherwise than they seem to be, and really are, at present.  I might have written these matters with less plainness, but I did not think it right to do so, but rather to explain nakedly and clearly to your kindness the whole state of the case.  May God every way be with you, and preserve you to the glorifying of his name, and the benefit of his church!  Strasburgh, Dec. 9, 1554
          Your most attached,
              JAMES HADDON.
  P.S.  I have the greatest regard for that most excellent man, master Bibliander, and for the most honored father, master Pellican.  I request your kindness to salute them both from me.

LETTER CXXXVI. JAMES HADDON TO HENRY BULLINGER
Strasburgh
Jan. 8, 1555
  Greeting.  Your letter, most honored sir, was most gratifying to me, both on account of the sympathy which you manifest in my misfortunes, and of the regard and truly paternal affection towards me which I now perceive you to entertain.  A fortnight after I had written my last letter to you, one was delivered to me from England, informing me that I have been entirely stripped of all my property, as I before explained to you, but that there was now some hope from other quarters.  I thought it my duty therefore to inform you of this by the very first opportunity, that as you were heretofore distressed on my account, so you may now with me return thanks to God our Father, to whom I doubt not but that you have prayed together with me, and commended me and my cause to him.
  I have also to thank you very much on behalf of Banks.  For my very dear brother Lever has informed me, that master Sultzer has arranged for me to send Banks to Basle at the Frankfort fair; for he has met with one Parkes, a printer, I believe, with whom he will place Banks.  I would say more, but am suddenly interrupted by the bearer, who will convey this letter early to-morrow morning.  I pray you therefore to take this, as you do every thing of mine, in good part.  For I thought it my duty to send you this by the present opportunity, rather than nothing at all, lest I should occasion you greater concern and anxiety than would become me; because I have not only perceived from your letter, but have gathered from others, the anxious inquiries you had determined to make on behalf of Banks, if this had not succeeded.  May God long preserve you for the benefit of his church and the comfort of many!  Strasburgh, Jan. 8, 1555
            Your most attached,
              JAMES HADDON.

LETTER CXXXVII. JAMES HADDON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Jan. 15, 1555
  Greeting.  Most honorable and my very good friend, I send you herewith certain heads of a discourse held by him whom the inscription points out.  It is possible that he embraced many more topics at that time, but most likely they were all to the same effect.  I have translated them from the English, just as they were brought here, word for word as nearly as I could.  Shall we wonder at the unheard of boldness of the man in inventing, or his singular shamelessness in lying, or his subtle and versatile talent, and (so to speak) most godless mind, for that, having so long stored up in his remembrance so many slaughters and such heavy charges of treason, he could cherish and foster them with such hypocrisy and dissimulation?  I think there was never heard tell of such a turncoat and monster of a man, and pest of the state, if the book he published many years since in a quite contrary sense, and written too with such emphasis and asseveration as that nothing apparently can exceed it, be compared with his present assertions.  But we have justly deserved portents of this kind, for having almost despised the godly and those who told us the truth.  May God now take compassion on us, and hear the prayers of his own people, as in his mercy he is wont to do; and may he succor our not only distressed but deplorable, and, as far as human aid is concerned, desperate condition!  Many signal examples show that he has done so; nor do I doubt but that he will again do it in his own time.  In the mean time, all things are working together for good to his people.  He who keeps Israel will neither slumber nor sleep.  And that noble act related by Moses in Exodus, and mentioned by you, and so often recorded in the Judges and Prophets, affords abundant consolation.  I will not at this time trespass any longer upon your kindness.  I hope that my last letter has been delivered to you ere now, bearing testimony to the good result of your letter to master Sultzer on behalf of Banks, and for which I again thank you in his name.  May God every way be with you!  Strasburgh, Jan. 15, 1555
            Your most attached,
                JAMES HADDON.
  P. S. My countryman and friend, Abel the merchant, warmly salutes you.  He was with me at the beginning of the winter, and it is from him that I have the copy of the writing which I send you.

LETTER CXXXVIII. JAMES HADDON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
April 24, 1555
  Greeting.  Your letter, most honored sir, testifying your affection and exceeding love towards me, was delivered to me on my return from Frankfort.  You tell me that you write to me in all the hurry of business, whereat I partly rejoice, and am partly sorry: for your letter, short as it is, contains singular consolation drawn from the examples of Joshua and Jehoiada; but I am sorry that I was an hinderance to you when so well and so actively employed.  For I am aware that the charge of many and most weighty concerns is laid upon you, and that you are almost continually distracted by matters of the greatest importance.  I must therefore beg of you not to withdraw yourself in future, even a single moment, on my account from any business whatever, unless when a breathing-time and leisure shall be afforded you.  For although, being not now engaged in any public labor or employment, I am able frequently to write to your reverence, the case is not the same with you.  Wherefore, although I hear from you most gladly and with the greatest eagerness, yet I shall be content if you do not answer my letters, except at the times and on the terms above stated.  On which subject the bearer also will communicate with you by message from me.  I have learned also by the information of our friend Chambers the exertions made by your kindness in respect to Banks.  He is not yet recovered, but is better.  He will always acknowledge himself very greatly indebted to you, and I offer you my best thanks on his behalf.  We commit the repayment of this favor to God, who alone can accomplish it effectually, and whom I pray to preserve and direct you for the advantage and benefit of his church.  In whom farewell.  Strasburgh, April 24, 1555
            Your reverence’s most devoted.
                JAMES HADDON.
  P. S. I have saluted our friend Sampson and the others in your name.

LETTER CXXXIJAMES HADDON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Dec. 7, 1555
  Much health.  My very dear friend in Christ, I have been often thinking of writing to you for some months past; but nothing has occurred which seemed worthy of being committed to paper, especially as reports were spread abroad with various degrees of uncertainty.  But it is now certain that that bitter scourge of divine justice, the most cruel of all men within our memory, and who most eagerly thirsted for the blood of the saints, has been removed from this life.  But though our sins had richly deserved so great an evil, and even a punishment yet more severe, on account of the listlessness and ingratitude which for the most part pervaded our country when the free course of the gospel was allowed us, yet our heavenly Father and Almighty God has manifested his usual kindness and power.  That illustrious pair, masters Ridley and Latimer, offered themselves to God a short time before, an admirable and noble sacrifice; and their ashes (together with those of others who had gone before them, and who now live in the presence of our Lord and Savior) have, methinks, called down the judgment of God upon the above-mentioned scourge of heaven.  We have no other certain or confirmed intelligence, as far as I am at present aware, worthy of being communicated to you.  Besides, I think that you have been made acquainted either previously or more fully from others with the facts I have above stated, though I considered it also my duty to write to you to the same effect; for it seems very long since I had any intercourse with you.  Salute for me, I pray you, master Gesner.  Please to remember me, and the condition of our country, in your prayers, as I doubt not but you will.  May God be with you and your ministry, and preserve you for the benefit of his church!  Strasburgh, Dec. 7, 1555
            Yours,
              JAMES HADDON.

LETTER CXL. JAMES HADDON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
March 12, 1556
  Health in the Lord.  I have written to you before, but I now doubt whether my letter was delivered to you; not that I wish to interrupt you, occupied as you are in most weighty affairs, much less to draw you away from them for a moment by replying to my letter; nor indeed were the matters upon which I wrote to you of such consequence as to require an answer.  They informed you of the tidings which we had then received from England.  What I have now to write is much less worth your notice; but I nevertheless send you this letter, because it seems to me a long time since I have corresponded with your reverence, or have heard from yourself.  Our friend Burcher, when on his return from you, replied to my inquiries concerning you, that you were not in good health.  But as I have not yet received any further account, I very much desire to hear from yourself, how you do.  I ask nothing more, and not even this, except at your leisure.  There are many reasons why I am anxious to hear of your health.  Nor is it to be wondered at that I am exceedingly anxious about you as an individual, since I have discovered your regard for me to be such as it has been declared to be by the report of some of our friends.  I doubt not but that these times occasion much grief to yourself, as to all godly persons, and cause many and deep sighs to be breathed forth.  But what can you do?  He who sits in the highest heavens looks down upon lowly things in heaven and earth.  He wills his people to be tried, but will not suffer his church to be left altogether destitute; but as that man of sin has already been partly detected by yourself and those like you, so he will at last be destroyed by the breath of the mouth of the Lord.  Amen, amen!  May the Lord be with you by his Spirit, and preserve you for the good of his church!  Strasburgh, March 15, 1556
            Your most devoted,
                JAMES HADDON.
  P. S. I wish every happiness, according to the will of God, to masters Bibliander, Pellican, and Gesner.

LETTER CXLI. JOHN BANKS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
March 15, 1554
  You will probably be surprised, most excellent sir, at my writing to you these turbulent times, which I have never done before; and the rather, because I had no personal acquaintance with her [of whom I write], and am about to address you upon those subjects which would occasion the greatest danger to myself, in case my letter should be intercepted before the bearer of it leaves England.  But I have not thought this consideration of sufficient consequence to retard my purpose, since it was both godly in itself, and truly deserving of being known by every one, and especially by your reverence, by reason of that kindness and good-will which you entertain towards the very noble family of Grey in this country, and which you have not hesitated to illustrate by your own recorded testimony.  But though this family is now overthrown and almost extinct, on account of their saving profession of our Savior, and the cause of the gospel; yet all godly and truly Christian persons have not so much reason to mourn over the ruin of a family so illustrious, as to rejoice that the latest action of her life was terminated in bearing testimony to the name of Jesus; and the rather, because those who rest with Christ the Lord in the kingdom of his Father, will not have to behold with their own eyes the wretched and lamentable overthrow of our nation.  It is we, we who are wretched, who are not only hearing every day the name of the Savior loaded with reproach, but witnessing the most horrible slaughter of those who have endeavored to promote his glory, and extend his kingdom.
  But to return to the Greys, about whom I purposed to commune with you in this letter, both on account of your peculiar regard for them, as evinced by your godly writings; and by reason of my own affection towards those now dead, to whom I diligently endeavored, during their life-time, to prove my respect.
  Jane then, the daughter of the duke, was truly admirable, not so much by reason of her incredible attainments in literature, by which in the seventeenth year of her age she excelled all other ladies, as by reason of the remarkable firmness with which, though a young girl, she surpassed men in maintaining the cause of Christ; insomuch that she could neither be defeated by any contrivances which the papists imagined against her, nor be deceived by any of their artifices, as your reverence will understand from a discourse of hers which I now send you.
  This conference was held by her with master Feckenham, a clever and crafty papist, upon some controverted points of our religion, upon which she explained her opinion with much learning and ingenuity.  And that she persevered in this confession of faith even to the last, is sufficiently evident from the statement she made a little before her execution.  This I have thought fit to send together with the other, because they seemed to me worthy of being universally known.  Moreover, it may be seen how her truly admirable mind was illuminated by the light of God’s word, by two letters, one of which she herself wrote to the lady Catharine, her sister, a most noble virgin, to inspire her with a love of the sacred writings, and the other to a certain apostate, to bring him back to Christ the Lord.  I have taken the pains to translate both of these letters from our vernacular language into Latin, that your excellence may perceive that the pains which you have taken to enlighten that family and incite them to the love of godliness have not been ill bestowed.  For I can bear testimony, which, if not very abundant, is at least that of an eye-witness, that the whole family of the Greys, and Jane especially, derived incredible benefit from your writings.  She indeed had not only diligently perused, but also committed to memory, almost all the heads of your sixth Decade.
  The duke also himself devoted as much time as he could steal from the affairs of the nation, in which we was engaged, to the reading of scripture, and especially to your writings, with the milky eloquence of which he used to say that he was wonderfully delighted.  From the reading of which too he derived the greatest benefit, when certain wicked wretches endeavored to draw him away, while in prison, from the faith and confession of the true Christ.  But they were in no wise able to move him; for he confessed the Lord Christ even to his latest breath.  And at the time he was led to execution, though the papists brought forward one of the council, a swine out of the herd, who defended the catholic church, the mass, the fathers, and customs established by length of time, yet he would not acknowledge any other atonement than that which was perfected by the death of Christ: by this faith he supported himself, and in this faith he at length ended his life.  I would speak of the entire overthrow of religion in England, and the fury of antichrist, only that those who are continually coming over from England to Zurich, that most wealthy mart of all good learning, will make you acquainted with it.  It now remains for me earnestly to entreat your reverence again and again to take this my service in good part, and to enroll me among the number of your friends; and to beseech the Lord that our England may at length be delivered from that tyranny of the papists by which she is now oppressed.  Farewell, most excellent Bullinger, and continue, as you do, to set forth the kingdom of Christ in your writings!  London, March 15, 1554

LETTER CXLII. JOHN BANKS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Dec. 9, 1554
  No circumstance has ever afforded me greater pleasure than the condescension of your reverence in not only admitting me among the number of your friends, but in so courteously declaring this by your written letter; in which, whenever I peruse it, as I do very frequently, I seem to observe two things especially worthy of commendation.  In the first place your singular kindness appears from this circumstance, that a person like yourself, so justly admired by every one, should condescend, in the midst of so many and important engagements, to write to an obscure individual like myself.  Your rare judgment in the next place is shown by your disapproving of the publication of what possibly may be injurious to many individuals; a circumstance which I had not before considered.  I now, however, perceive that our adversaries in England are most mightily disturbed by certain pamphlets, and that they are endeavoring to exclude us from the liberality of those from whom we were expecting the necessary means of subsistence.  Nothing indeed now seems to be left for us, but either that we English, who are in exile from our country for the sake of God’s word, must support ourselves by the labor of our hands, or else implore the assistance of godly individuals to enable us to continue our studies; whereby, should it please God to restore us to our country, we may be able to refute the doctrines of the papists, and to explain to our people and nation the artifices by which they have been circumvented and deceived by them.  The godly men, by whom we have hitherto been aided and supported, are either all of them cast into prison on our account, or, if any are still at liberty, they are so carefully watched by the papists, that they can afford us no assistance without the greatest danger.  Whence it is, that we are at this time placed in great difficulty; and it is come to this, that each individual must look out how he can best provide for himself.  For my own part, I have no hope of being able to continue in the course of studies I had determined to pursue; for he who has maintained me hitherto, is new reduced to the like straits as the rest of the English, being spoiled of all his property, and (such is the malice of his enemies) without any hope.  I speak of master James Haddon, a man who deserved to be rich for his liberality to the poor.  Since, therefore, my condition is such, that I am unable, through want of means, to pursue the course of study I had proposed, I would willingly follow that which seems desirable in the next place, and engage in that kind of life which is most nearly allied to literary pursuits; in which object, as I understand your excellence has it in your power greatly to benefit me by your recommendation, relying upon that kindness which you have so manifestly expressed in your letter, I make bold to implore your aid and co-operation.  There is a printer in your town, of the name of Froschover, of whose integrity and diligence in his art the bearer of this letter speaks most highly, and has advised me to use my endeavors to induce him by any means to employ me as a corrector and reviser of such books as are printed at his press.  Your recommendation, I believe, will go far to effect this object.  Wherefore, should your excellence grant me this favor, I shall consider myself to have received an especial benefit, and will use my best endeavors that you may not seem to have recommended an unworthy person.  Farewell, most excellent sir, and most esteemed by me in the Lord.  Strasburgh, Dec. 9, 1554
          Your piety’s most devoted,
              JOHN BANKS, Anglus.

LETTER CXLIII. JOHN BANKS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Jan. 9, 1555
  I have perceived by the letter of your reverence, not indeed written to me, but to my singular good patron and much esteemed master in Christ, master Haddon, about me, that you have no less exerted yourself on my behalf, than if I had been your own son, and not a stranger, and only known to you by letter.  I cannot therefore express the thanks due to your reverence for the pains you have taken on my behalf.  But when I reflect that you were born for this very purpose, to succor the brethren, and to show yourself a true Christian, namely, one who devotes his talents to the good of all, not only the men of this present age, but of posterity also; I consider you in no respect inferior to the greatest characters, and that in your brotherly affection and incredible diligence you easily excel them all.  There are indeed some very learned and truly pious persons, but who will not readily allow themselves to be withdrawn from their studies, even though from such interruption great advantage might arise to their brethren.  But you on the contrary, seem to regard nothing as of more importance, than in the midst of your ministerial labors to allow of an interruption in those studies so necessary and beneficial to the church of Christ, and this too for no small interval, for the sake of affording aid to a poor wretch like myself, when placed in circumstances of some difficulty.  Most gladly therefore would I express by some grateful attestation, how much I value your good will towards me; but this your more than paternal kindness towards me exceeds all power of expression or even of thought.  I will diligently endeavor therefore, and it is all I can do, that you may not seem to have recommended an unworthy person.  But as to your excusing yourself to me, who indeed am I, that one like yourself, so justly and universally respected, should think it necessary to excuse yourself in the midst of your important engagements, for not replying to such an insignificant individual as I am, and who is moreover so greatly indebted to your kindness, and had rather undergo any thing than be in any way a hinderance to your studies?  Wherefore I return my best possible thanks to your piety, and since I can do nothing else, I will always bear your goodness in mind in my prayers; and I pray our great and good God, through Christ our Savior, very long to preserve you to his church.  January 9, 1555 
          Your piety’s most devoted.
                JOHN BANKS.

LETTER CXLIV THOMAS HARDING TO HENRY BULLINGER.
New College, Oxford
Oct. 19, 1551
  If, as it has been observed of old, friendships have often been dissolved by neglected intercourse, what is there, most learned Bullinger, to preclude the hope that the friendship of good men may be obtained and cemented by their being addressed with courtesy and respect? and especially when this is done upon just grounds, and without any suspicion of flattery or self-interest.
  For my own part, a regard to my duty, as well as the very reasonable request of these young men to be introduced to your notice, has afforded me a sufficient occasion of writing to you.  For who can be so insensible to every courteous feeling, as not to be compelled to write and return you thanks for those kind offices you did me when I was with you about the first of May three years since, on my way into Italy, whither I was then proceeding for the purpose of study?  Nor can I ever forget with what kindness you received me, and with what liberality you entertained me; not to mention in the mean time, with what learned and grave discourse you detained me, who was exceedingly desirous of an interview with you, for some hours in your house; and, to speak plainly, satisfied my mind, when, inquiring and hesitating about some matters, as they appeared to me, of no small importance, you relieved me entirely from all doubt and perplexity.  To this I must add that other token of no common regard and esteem, (for such I ought to consider it,) in that you then inquired my name, just as if I were a person of consequence, and inscribed it among your papers.
  As often indeed as these acts of kindness recur to my mind, as they do very frequently, I think of what Timotheus said respecting a supper of Plato, to which he was invited by him, when he met him the next day, namely, that the suppers of Plato were not only agreeable for the present moment, but for the day following.  The same thing may be affirmed in a larger sense respecting your kindness, that it was not only gratifying for the moment, but has now been so for many months, and will be, I hope, for many yeas.  And indeed, had not my circumstances ordered it otherwise, and drawn me away at that time to other places, almost against my will, I should on no account have suffered myself to have been so soon separated and disunited from your most learned society, of which I had then first begun to taste the enjoyment.  But as the state of my affairs has, contrary to my inclination, continually precluded me from this happiness, it only remained for me to propose to myself the occasional enjoyment of your society and intercourse by epistolary correspondence.  And just as I had returned to England, and was seeking how to carry this into effect, and was purposing to write to you, John ab Ulmis, who was (as he says) formerly your pupil, paid me a most opportune visit.  He prays me to commend these young men to you by a written letter; which indeed I have promised very readily, both for his own sake, with whom I have had some acquaintance, and also for their sakes, as perceiving them to be such, as for their peculiar modesty, probity, and erudition, are most entirely deserving of the warmest commendation.  You will not therefore, I entreat you, according to your most kind disposition, think lightly of this my commendation, but will receive into your kindness and good-will these youths, Andrew Croariensis and Stumphius, on their return to you.  I dare assure you in the mean time from their very honorable and gentlemanly conduct, that however great may be the advantage that may accrue to you from the regard of the most worthy characters, no less will accrue to you from the attachment of the persons in question; and that you will acknowledge them to be young men of tried probity, courtesy, and honorable feeling, as well as of unvaried good temper.  You will certainly confer upon me the greatest obligation, if you will so conduct yourself towards them, as to make them know that this my recommendation has had some weight with you.  Farewell.  Oxford, New College, Oct. 19, 1551
  Salute very affectionately from me our friend Butler.

LETTER CXLV. HENRY SIDALL TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Christ Church Oxford
Oct. 4, 1552
  Much health.  Last year, most honored sir, I received a letter from your excellence in favor of this youth ab Ulmis, which was on many accounts very gratifying to me, but, if I must speak the truth, altogether superfluous.  For this piety, integrity, and zeal for learning had already so interested me in his favor, that I should consider myself to have received a benefit by having it in my power to confer one upon him.  For any individual, in whom I discover such good qualities, cannot but be very dear to me, to whatever country he may belong; for I heartily detest all respect of persons.  In this large college my trifling exertions cannot have been of much advantage to him; but my mind has at all times been well-disposed towards him, which I can promise will always be the case, provided only, which I hope will not take place, he shall not change his conduct.  But since he has now gone back to you, and is, it seems, somewhat doubtful of returning to England, I do not see how I can be of any service to him in future, except perhaps by imploring your clemency to regard him with greater kindness and affection than hitherto, which I most ardently entreat your piety to do.  For his conduct in this numerous society of learned men has always been so amiable and unpolluted, and so obedient to all our statutes and domestic regulations, that it has most justly earned for him the greatest commendation from all persons, and a more than paternal regard from myself.  Moreover, his discretion has always been exceedingly approved by me, inasmuch as he has so accommodated himself to our habits, that he never could justly be reproached by any one as a foreigner, but has deserved universal commendation as one conversant with our laws and country.  I have thought it my duty to acquaint your excellence in good faith with these matters, lest any suspicion should arise on your part that he has conducted himself otherwise in this place than would become a youth of the most excellent character.  I should have written to you at this time concerning our university of Oxford, and the restoration of religion, and the number of the godly among us, only that this youth will be able to relate all these things to you better at your leisure.  Your piety may know this for an undoubted truth, that many among us are exceedingly united to you in spirit, although personally separated by sea and land; among whom I wish to be counted the chief.  For although I am far inferior in many other respects, in this I will yield to no one.  Farewell in the Lord.  Oxford, Christ Church, Oct. 4, 1552
              H. SIDALL

LETTER CXLVI. RALPH SKINNER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Oxford
Jan. 5, 1550
  Health and peace in the Lord.  John ab Ulmis has frequently requested me long since, most excellent Bullinger, to send you a letter; but latterly he has left no stone unturned to extort from me these few lines, and I must candidly confess that he has not without difficulty induced me to write now.  Not that I entertained any doubt of your kindness, or that the ingenuousness of your disposition has not been well known long since both by your own writings and the report of others; but partly from my having forgotten how to write Latin by reason of long disuse, and partly because I am too modest to presume to trouble, with my unpolished letter, you who are occupied in so many and important affairs of the church.  I readily admit, most learned sir, that I owe you this duty; and I acknowledge also, that I owe you many and great thanks for the honorable mention which you made of me in your letter to my patron, the marquis of Dorset.  I have certainly long regarded you with the greatest love and veneration, for the sake of the true religion, and considered myself much indebted to you in the name of all Christian people.  But latterly, my Bullinger, you have so bound me to you for my own sake and that of my country, that you cannot in future attach me more.  For you seem to be affected with as it were a father’s feeling, and no ordinary regard towards our England.  You have every where publicly eulogized that country in many ways by your excellent lucubrations and most learned writings.  And on this account you have obtained true and just praise with all good and learned men, of whom, thank God, a great number is at this time found among us.  And you may learn from this, that you have not labored among us in the Lord’s vineyard to no purpose; and how much honor and gratitude is owing to our excellent king, and how much we owe to our rulers, who not only are favorers of the truth themselves, but are also good and firm patrons of all who embrace it.  And you have certainly bestowed upon them in these your writings no undeserved or unworthy commendation.  For they justly deserve it, and are to be praised on every account; and we very properly rejoice, whenever it has happened that you have dedicated your lucubrations to men of this character.  For an useful stimulus is hence afforded to them in their progress, and encouragement given, that they may not be weary of completing in the best way what they have well begun.  And this I hope will very soon be the case.  For they have lately assembled a convocation, and appointed certain persons to purify our church from the filth of antichrist, and to abolish those impious laws of the Roman pontiff, by which the spouse of Christ has for so long a time been wretchedly and shamefully defiled; and to substitute new ones, better and more holy, in their place.  it will be our duty meanwhile, diligently to implore God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, that true, pure, and undefiled religion may at length begin to flourish, not here only, but throughout the whole earth.  I have written, excellent Bullinger, at greater length than I at first intended, and yet there remain many things, with which I could wish you to be acquainted, did time suffice for that purpose.  But I will defer them for the present.  I shall in my next letter possibly impart all my grievances.  Meanwhile, excellent sir, farewell, and I pray God that he may long preserve you to us for the manifestation of his glory!  Oxford, Jan. 5
          Yours heartily,
            RALPH SKINNER.


LETTER CXLVII. JOHN WILLOCK TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Oxford
May 12, 1552
  Health in Christ.  I came over to Oxford on the 11th of May, which as soon as John ab Ulmis knew, he has never ceased asking me, most excellent sir, to send you a letter.  I could not therefore refuse him, as he requested what is proper, and rightly reminded me of my duty.  I wrote you a letter soon after Christmas, but know not whether it ever reached you.  I will therefore only at present briefly touch upon the heads of what I then wrote.  First of all, I return everlasting thanks for the kindness by which you were induced to make such affectionate mention of me in your dedicatory preface to our prince.  I have ever admired your universally acknowledged learning and erudition; but I now embrace again and again, and most readily recognize, your exceeding kindness and incredible regard to myself.  The prince certainly received that little present of yours with a most grateful and well-disposed mind; and you must know that you have not acted more honorably, than usefully and piously; for, as Socrates says, the exhortations of great men are as a whip and spur to happy perseverance in a praiseworthy course of life.  Every night, when we were employed on the Scottish borders, after the book had been received there from John ab Ulmis, with great difficulty on his part, his highness was not satisfied with having a large portion of your book merely read to him, but would have it diligently examined; by which I perceived him, endued as he was with a most excellent disposition, greatly to improve; and indeed he very often expressed himself greatly obliged to you for it.
  You will truly learn the state of my affairs from the bearer of this letter.  I had intended at first to have written more, but business and my journey itself necessarily call me elsewhere.  I will however add a few things to which you will exceedingly oblige me by sending a reply.  First then, I ask, whether that be a legitimate and true marriage which is contracted without the knowledge or consent of parents; and whether those persons can be said to live piously and lawfully in holy matrimony, who being so married, continue in the same; or whether they may be allowed to separate themselves again at the desire of their parents.  I ask, secondly, whether a woman leaving her own husband, and attaching herself to another during his life-time, may be allowed to marry him after the death of her own husband, to whom during that husband’s life-time she had attached herself.  I inquire, thirdly, whether those are to be considered as living piously in holy wedlock, who through fear of death in time of persecution have mutually betrothed themselves without witnesses, but have nevertheless declared before many persons that they were married, and have lived together for the space of twenty years.  I entreat you again and again briefly to explain your sentiments upon these points.  I have written hastily and in confusion: take it in good part, as I doubt not but that you will do.  Farewell, most excellent and very dear master Bullinger, and always commend my ministry in your prayers.  Oxford, May 12, 1552
        Your honor’s most devoted.
              JOHN WILLOCK.

LETTER CXLVIII. BARTHOLOMEW TRAHERON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
Feb. 20, 1540
  I should indeed be uncourteous, most learned Bullinger, not to address you by letter, who, when I was among you, treated me with so much kindness.  You can however guess the reason of my not having written last fair.  And though the same reason may possibly still exist, I have thought it right to break my silence, lest my delay should seem not so much to arise from the state of the time, as from forgetfulness and neglect.  But this, believe me, is not at all agreeable to my disposition.  For my mind is by no means insensible to mutual friendship, and I am of all persons least unmindful of any kindness that has been shown me.  I have nothing to relate at present, except that all the monks in this country have lost the appellation, that some of the principal monasteries are turned into schools of studious men, and that three of the most wealthy abbots were led to execution a little before Christmas, for having joined in a conspiracy to restore the pope.  I must not omit to tell you that the bishop of Winchester preached a very popish sermon, to the great discontent of the people, on the first Sunday in Lent, and that he was ably answered by Dr. Barnes on the following Lord’s day with the most gratifying, and all but universal, applause.  The points which the bishop principally handled I have related to John Butler, from whom you may learn them.  You will hear other news from other correspondents.  The Lord Audley, an excellent man, and in the king’s service, has conceived a great regard for you from my commendation, and has bidden me not only to salute you respectfully in his name, but to tell you, that if you send over your son to this country, he will treat him with the attention due to the offspring of a very dear and honored man.  I salute much your mother, wife, brothers, children, and the whole family.  Salute likewise in my name those worthy and excellent men masters Pellican, [Leo] Judæ, Rhelican, and Megander.  Farewell.  London, Feb. 20
              B. TRAHERON.

LETTER CXLIX. BARTHOLOMEW TRAHERON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
Feb. 18, 1546
  Health in the Lord.  I wrote to you many weeks since, and gave the letter to our most loving friend, master Calvin, who was going to Berne, that it might be forwarded to you from thence.  But as far as I can judge by the letter which you sent by master Butler’s messenger, mine has not yet reached you; and as I make no doubt but that you would have made some mention of it, this circumstance annoys and vexes me not a little.  For as the rest of my countrymen have written to you, and as I myself too have addressed others in your city by letter, you might well charge me with ingratitude for having neglected you, to whom I owe so much.  Had I really done so, I doubt not but that some time or other I should have suffered the just vengeance of Jupiter the protector of strangers.  But believe me, I thought of nothing less, and therefore sent off my letter to you before my singular good friend and very dear brother, master Butler, had procured this messenger.  But, as I perceive, the matter turned out unfortunately.  It has indeed vexed me most exceedingly, not that there was any thing in the letter which I considered worth your reading, but from the fear that I may possibly be regarded by you as either undervaluing your friendship towards me, or being unmindful of your kindness.  And I hardly know which of these two I should choose the least.  It is a proof of your singular courtesy that you have joined me in your letter to master Butler.  Whence also I have good hope that you will not unwillingly accept this my vindication, although I call heaven to witness that I have not in any way offended against our friendship, unless perhaps this may be called an offense, that I did not write you another letter when a regular messenger was at hand; and in this I acknowledge myself to be somewhat to blame.  But who would have thought that the letter would not reach you which I gave to master Calvin, and he again to master Megander?  If I ever allow from henceforth any messenger to come over to you from us without a letter from me, you are at liberty to esteem me among the number of the ungrateful, or even of those who hate their friends; which however, of all deeds of wickedness, I would least wish to attach to myself.  For I am, if any one is, so disposed to mutual affection, that sometimes I do every thing but doat even upon those who wish no good to myself.  At all events, I have such an affection for all learned men who have deserved well of me, that nothing affords me more pleasure, or is more deeply rooted in my mind.  How then can I forget you, whose erudition has always been most delightful and profitable to me, and whose acts of kindness to me are so numerous?  There is no reason, therefore, why you should suppose that it arose from forgetfulness of you, that my letter has not yet reached you; but there is a reason why you should make inquiry of master Megander, who has neglected to forward it.  You perceive, I hope, that I am not at all to blame, excepting that I did not write to you twice.  I heartily congratulate you on the accession of a little son, and one too, who was Christened on the day of his birth; and I no less rejoice that the very excellent lady, your wife, is delivered from this danger.  We are very anxious to know what Luther and his party are doing about the eucharist.  There is I know not what report here, that the minds of the Bernese are somewhat inclined to Bucer’s opinions.  Here, as far as we have been able to judge, hitherto, all things are properly set forth.
  To yourself, all your children, your excellent wife, grandmother, and Rodolph, I wish all happiness and prosperity, and true joy in Christ.  Farewell, my very dear friend master Bullinger, with all belonging to you.
          B. TRAHERON

LETTER CL. BARTHOLOMEW TRAHERON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
Aug. 1, 1548
  What more delightful gratification could possibly be afforded me, than to receive a letter from so great a distance, from one who is on many accounts so dear to me, and whom, by reason of his singular piety and erudition, I can never sufficiently admire?  You have also, my excellent Bullinger, anticipated me in deserving the commendation of courtesy; but as there is perhaps no occasion for me to state the reason of my so long silence, nor indeed can I do so without much pain, I shall let it pass, and express my thanks to you for your most agreeable letter, which has indeed cheered me mere than I am able to express.  For I am thus led to consider that the pure form of religion is now set forth among you, and that your own exertions in this cause have been such as to render the remembrance of you at all times most delightful to me.
  As to our own affairs, and the extent to which we have made progress in matters of religion, I do not think you can be ignorant.  You must know that all our countrymen, who are sincerely favorable to the restoration of truth, entertain in all respects like opinions with you; and not only such as are placed at the summit of honor, but those who are ranked in the number of men of learning.  I except the archbishop of Canterbury and Latimer, and a very few learned men besides; for from among the nobility I know not one whose opinions are otherwise than what they ought to be.  As to Canterbury, he conducts himself in such a way, I know not how, as that the people do not think much of him, and the nobility regard him as lukewarm.  In other respects he is a kind and good-natured man.  As to Latimer, though he does not clearly understand the true doctrine of the eucharist, he is nevertheless more favorable than either Luther or even Bucer.  I am quite sure that he will never be a hinderance to this cause.  For, being a man of admirable talent, he sees more clearly into the subject than the others, and is desirous to come into our sentiments, but is slow to decide, and cannot without much difficulty and even timidity renounce an opinion which he has once imbibed.  But there is good hope that he will some time or other come over to our side altogether.  For he is so far from avoiding any of our friends, that he rather seeks their company, and most anxiously listens to them while discoursing upon this subject, as one who is beyond measure desirous that the whole truth may be laid open to him, and even that he may be thoroughly convinced.  But more upon this subject when I have more time.
  Salute, I pray you in my name, those excellent and most learned men, masters Theodore Bibliander, the ornament not only of Switzerland, but of all Germany; Gualter, and the rest, together with the most courteous mayor, my host, and your amiable wife.  Farewell.  London, Aug. 1
        Yours,
          BARTHO. TRAHERON.
  I have not yet been able to see the young man whom you commended to me, because I was absent from London when he arrived.  If I can be of service to him in any way, I shall most readily exert myself for your sake.  I hear that he is now at Oxford.  Again farewell.

LETTER CLI. BARTHOLOMEW TRAHERON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
Sept. 28, 1548
  How greatly am I indebted to you, most excellent Bullinger, who have thought proper not only to address me in a most courteous letter, but to present me also with your learned and pious lucubrations.  I feel myself unable to express by words the pleasure which this your regard to me has afforded.  I should most gladly have addressed you by letter long since, but such painful events have occurred among us during this year, and altogether so unheard of, that I could not apply my mind to write; indeed, I scarcely wished to live.  I doubt not but that you will have heard the whole history.  All things, through the wonderful goodness of God, seem now settled.  The religion of Christ, which appeared to be giving way, stands firm; and this we attribute solely to the providence of God.  We fear, however, lest Flanders should occasion some disturbance.  We have a king who is firm, learned, and pious beyond his age.  If there has ever existed a Josiah since the first of that name, this is certainly he.  And do you also be pleased to implore our common Father in your public prayers to preserve him to us in safety.  Believe me, my Bullinger, a more holy disposition has no where existed in our time.  He alone seems to sustain the gospel by his incredible piety, most holy manners, prudence altogether that of an old man, with a firmness at this age altogether unheard of.  So great a work of God ought not to be unknown to the godly.  But that you may add yet more to the praises of God, you must know that Latimer has come over to our opinion respecting the true doctrine of the eucharist, together with the archbishop of Canterbury and the other bishops, who heretofore seemed to be Lutherans.  Let us implore God with our united prayers, to complete a work so favorably begun; and may he long preserve you and yours!  Salute very much my dear brethren masters Pellican, Bibliander, and Gualter.  Farewell.  London, Sept. 28
          Yours,
          BARTHOLOMEW TRAHERON.

LETTER XLII. BARTHOLOMEW TRAHERON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
Dec. 31, 1548
  I cannot refrain, my excellent Bullinger, from acquainting you with circumstances that have lately given us the greatest pleasure, that you and your fellow-ministers may participate in our enjoyment.  On the 14th of December, if I mistake not, a disputation was held at London concerning the eucharist, in the presence of almost all the nobility of England.  The argument was sharply contested by the bishops.  The archbishop of Canterbury, contrary to general expectation, most openly, firmly, and learnedly maintained your opinion upon this subject.  His arguments were as follows.  The body of Christ was taken up from us into heaven.  Christ has left the world.  “Ye have the poor always with you, but me ye have not always,” &c.  Next followed the bishop of Rochester, who handled the subject with so much eloquence, perspicuity, crudition, and power, as to stop the mouth of that most zealous papist, the bishop of Worcester.  The truth never obtained a more brilliant victory among us.  I perceive that it is all over with Lutheranism, now that those who were considered its principal and almost only supporters, have altogether come over to our side.  We are much indebted to the Lord who provides for us also in this particular.  I was unwilling, my dear friend, to defraud you of so great a pleasure, and which I pray God you may long enjoy.  Cordially salute master Bibliander and the other dear brethren.  I heartily wish every blessing to your wife and children.  Farewell.  Dec. 31, 1548
        (Postscript, added by John ab Ulmis.)
  Lo! just as master Traheron was about to send his letter, I happened to come into his room, and can do no otherwise then send you this brief salutation; for, owing to the great impatience of the messenger, I am unable to write more.  I will tell you every thing in a few days.  In haste.  London.  The foolish bishops have made a marvelous recantation.

LETTER CLIII. BARTHOLOMEW TRAHERON TO HENRY BULLINGER
Oxford
June 12, 1550
  How greatly am I indebted to you, most excellent Bullinger, who not only condescend to greet me with a letter, couched in the most friendly terms, but also to instruct me by your very learned treatise; while I, for my part, have nothing wherewith to repay you, but a heart much attached to you, and which, believe me, I shall retain such as long as I live.  And should any thing else at any time be in my power, I will not forget how much I owe you.  Do you meanwhile continue to advance the Christian religion by your erudite writings; you have all of us in this country favoring and applauding you.  If you desire to know the state of our affairs, religion is indeed prospering, but the wickedness of those who profess the gospel is wonderfully on the increase.  The people have made no disturbance this year, but there is reason to fear, lest roused partly by their own unquiet temper, and partly by the avarice of the higher orders, they should occasion some confusion, unless the Lord himself should think fit to avert it for the sake of our sovereign, who is making wonderful progress in learning, piety, and judgment.  Be pleased to commend to God in your prayers this prince of the greatest hope, who is even now a defender of the Christian religion almost to a miracle.  For unless God, offended by our sins, should take him away from us before he is grown up to manhood, we doubt not but that  England will produce another Constantine, or a character yet more excellent.  I entreat you therefore, for Christ’s sake, that you supplicate for him every happiness.  For, although you are so far distant, even you may hence derive some advantage.  For he both loves you, and acknowledged the religion of Christ to be exceedingly well established among you, and would have it ever to remain sound and unimpaired.  Farewell, my most honored brother.  Oxford, June 12, 1550
          Yours,
          BARTHO.TRAHERON.

LETTER CLIV. BARTHOLOMEW TRAHERON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
Sept. 10, 1552
  You have conferred a great obligation upon me, most learned Bullinger, who have both deigned to address me in your most delightful letter, and moreover to present me with one of your productions.  For nothing can proceed from you but what is, and ever will be, most agreeable.  It occasions me, meanwhile, no slight vexation that my circumstances have not hitherto permitted, and do not yet permit me, to declare how much I both love you, and acknowledge myself your debtor.  But should my affairs ever take a better turn, I will certainly endeavor to make you understand, that I both regard your singular kindness as I ought to do, and that I bear in mind the especial courtesy which you showed me at Zurich.  But I am not compelled to ask of you a new favor, even while I can find nothing wherewith to oblige you in return.  I am exceedingly desirous to know what you and the other very learned men, who live at Zurich, think respecting the predestination and providence of God.  If you ask the reason, there are certain individuals here who lived among you some time, and who assert that you lean too much to Melancthon’s views.  But the greater number among us, of whom I own myself to be one, embrace the opinion of John Calvin as being perspicuous, and most agreeable to holy scripture.  And we truly thank God, that that excellent treatise of the very learned and excellent John Calvin against Pighius and one Georgius Siculus should have come forth at the very time when the question began to be agitated among us.  For we confess that he has thrown much light upon the subject, or rather so handled it, as that we have never before seen any thing more learned or more plain.  We are anxious however, to know what are your opinions, to which we justly allow much weight.  We certainly hope that you differ in no respect from his excellent and most learned opinion.  At least you will please to point out what you approve in that treatise, or think defective, or reject altogether, if indeed you do reject any part of it, which we shall not easily believe.  And now enough of this subject.  That worthy young man, John ab Ulmis, who is recalled home by a letter from his family, will better inform you of the situation of our affairs.  Religion remains pure.  Our most excellent king is in the best health, and makes daily progress in learning and piety.  But, as I said, John ab Ulmis will give you a far more full and able account of these things.  Farewell, my very dear sir, and love me much.  Respectfully salute in my  name master mayor my host, together with the other worthy and most learned brethren.  London, Sept. 10, 1552
          Yours heartily,
          BARTHOLOMEW TRAHERON.

LETTER CLV. BARTHOLOMEW TRAHERON TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
June 3, 1553
  I acknowledge, my excellent Bullinger, your especial kindness, who for the sake of satisfying my earnest request have thought it no trouble to write to me so fully and accurately respecting the providence and predestination of God.  But though I admire both your exceeding learning and moderation in this writing of yours, nevertheless, to say the truth, I cannot altogether think as you do.  For you so state that God permits certain things, that you seem to take away from him the power of acting.  We say that God permits many things, when he does not renew men by his Spirit, but gives them up to the dominion of their own lusts.  And though God does not himself create in us evil desires, which are born with us; we maintain nevertheless, that he determines the place, the time, and mode [of bringing them into action], so that nothing can happen otherwise than as he has before determined that it should happen.  For, as Augustine has it, he ordains even darkness.  To be brief, we ascribe all actions to God, but leave to men whatever sin there is in them; which Augustine has, I think, stated in these words:  “To sin is in the power of men, but to produce this or that effect by sinning belongs not to them, but to God, who ordains darkness.”  Again, “God fulfills his own good purposes by the evil purposes of evil men.”  And to this belongs that saying, that in some wonderful and ineffable manner that does not take place without his will, which is done even against his will.
  But I am acting very indiscreetly in reminding you of these things, to whom all the writings of Augustine are so well known.  You do not approve of Calvin, when he states that God not only foresaw the fall of the first man, and in him the ruin of his posterity, but that he also at his own pleasure arranged it.  And unless we allow this, we shall certainly take away both the providence and the wisdom of God altogether.  I do not indeed perceive how this sentence of Solomon contains any thing less than this:  “The Lord hath made all things for himself: yea, even the wicked for the day of evil.” [Prov. xvi. 4]  And that of Paul: “Of him, and through him, and to him, are all things.” [Rom. xi. 36]  I pass over other expressions which the most learned Calvin employs, because they occur every where in the holy scriptures.  But I cannot think it either foolish or dangerous to follow that mode of speaking which the Holy Ghost uses.  And did it not seem superfluous, I would entreat you again and again, to beware lest any disagreement be occasioned between you by reason of these things.  For it will retard the course of the gospel not a little; and unless I am altogether mistaken, you will not be long able to support a cause that is tottering of itself.
  If you will send your children hither, they shall be regarded by me as my beloved brothers.  I have spoken with my dear friend master Cheke respecting Cœlius Secundus, who has, I think, informed you by letter either what he has done or is about to do.  Farewell, very dear Bullinger, and salute all the brethren in my name, especially my most worthy host the mayor, master Gualter, my countryman master Butler, &c.  Once more farewell.  London, June 3, 1553
            Your most loving
              BARTHOL. TRAHERON.

LETTER CLVI. BARTHOLOMEW TRAHERON TO JOHN CALVIN.
unknown
unknown
  I am now learning by experience, most accomplished Calvin, that whatever men may have proposed or determined, nevertheless every event is dependent upon the will of God; and that it often happens, that what we have purposed to do immediately, is accomplished either not at all, or after a long interval.  For whereas I had fully resolved in my mind soon to visit you, it has now so happened that I really cannot tell when I shall be able to do so.  For I have received a letter from home of such a nature, that I must go to England forthwith, whether I like it or not.  I know not whether any event more painful could have occurred to me, certainly none more disagreeable; for I was desirous of passing at least a year with you, as with one whose society appeared to me most delightful and profitable.  But, as I perceive, I must follow where fortune leads me.  I pray you therefore, that, though we are far separated in person, we may yet be united in spirit.  For you have deserved of me far otherwise than to make it possible for me ever to forget you; and I can no otherwise repay your favors to me than by the faithful remembrance of our friendship, which I shall most diligently and everlastingly retain.  As to the rest, with respect to the ten crowns I placed in your hands, I would not ask for them, were I not afraid of wanting money for my journey.  But take care that you do not put yourself to any inconvenience.  Salute for me the worthy master Farell, with all our other friends by name.  Farewell, my dear friend, long and happily!
          BARTHOLOMEW TRAHERON

LETTER CLVII. PETER ALEXANDER TO PAUL FAGIUS.
Lambeth
March 24, 1549
  That I have not yet written to you, my dear friend, you must attribute to no other cause but that I considered the letter which I wrote to that illustrious man, master Bucer, as intended also for yourself.  But now, since I am commissioned by the most reverend the archbishop to address you in his name, I cannot forbear sending you at least a short letter, to inform you of his exceeding good-will and most favorable inclination towards you and your affairs.  That I may not, therefore, detain you by any longer preamble, you must learn in few words the friendly feeling of our most reverend [archbishop], and his singular anxiety for the advancement of all the ministers of Christ.  This excellent personage, who is the principal instrument in replacing the church of Christ in this kingdom, and restoring it to its purity, has been informed of your having been dismissed by the senate of your city; and as, from his great anxiety for all godly ministers of the churches, he has taken a very lively interest in you and your affairs, he said it would be a very grievous thing both to you and your family, to be so unexpectedly deprived of a regular means of subsistence.  And since these churches of ours are in great want of learned men, and as he supposes that you will not any longer be able to obtain an honorable livelihood in your own country, he desires to see you in this kingdom as soon as possible, and has commissioned me to invite you by this my n his name.  I pray you, therefore, to come as soon as you possibly can, and cheer the most reverend archbishop, your attached friend, by your very early arrival.  There is no doubt, excellent sir, of your obtaining some honorable situation in this country; for I know for certain that you will be appointed to a most distinguished office in the university, either at Oxford or Cambridge, where you will derive a greater salary from your lectures than you ever received in your own country from your most important duties as a preacher.  Do not therefore, I pray you, any longer put off your journey, but come over to us immediately.  We have here the most reverend the lord archbishop of Canterbury, the most faithful son of the church, together with the most illustrious prince the lord protector, who, like another Joseph, next in rank to the king, is able to accomplish whatever he will, if only for the sake of Christ and the advancement of his glory.  And this he does most admirably, for he is in no wise wanting in his exertions and endeavors for the church of Christ and its faithful members in this kingdom; as whatever we see likely to turn out to the praise of God, and the advantage of the church, he endeavors with all the powers of his mind to effect as speedily as possible.  There is, moreover, that aged bishop master Latimer, who is most desirous of seeing you both, and who, since he has no little influence with the king, offers you his assistance in every possible way.  Come over, therefore, sir, without delay.  Salute your wife in my name, together with your [daughter] Charity.  Farewell.  Lambeth, March 24, 1549
          Yours, and your host that is to be,
              PETER ALEXANDER.

LETTER CLVIII. PAUL FAGIUS TO JOHN ULSTETTER.
Calais
April 18, 1549
  I greet you much, my beloved son-in-law.  Master Bucer and I quitted Strasburgh on the sixth of April, and having passed through Lorraine, Champagne, Picardy, Flanders and Artois, we arrived at Calais, the frontier city of England, without any difficulty whatever, on the eighteenth of the same month.  We were no where better accommodated than in the dominions of the emperor, from whom we were only distant two days’ journey.  We were most kindly received at Calais by the city authorities, all of whom were most anxiously expecting us: we found also master Peter Alexander, who had been sent thither by the archbishop to await our arrival.  Most desirable appointments are in store for us:  only may the Lord enable us to accomplish somewhat that may tend to his glory, and the edification of his church, and then all will be well.  Do you also, with your wife, my very dear daughter, render hearty thanks to the Lord for having with such fatherly care conducted us through all our enemies; and who we doubt not will mercifully protect us for the time to come.  We shall have to remain at Calais for one or two days on account of the high winds.  When we have crossed the sea, with Christ our guide, and have arrived in England, I will endeavor to acquaint you with my affairs at the earliest opportunity.  Do you also endeavor to let me know, as soon as possible, the situation of your own affairs.  Send your letter to Strasburgh to master Conrad Hubert, who will always be able to forward it to me without any difficulty.  My son Paul is at Canterbury, and, as master Peter tells me, in good health.  I hope to see him on Easter Monday, if not before.  Fare you well and happily, my very dear son-in-law, with your spouse, my very dear daughter; and salute for me most dutifully all my brethren, especially Erbius and Scriba.  In haste, from Calais, April 18, 15459  I hope also my son Timothy is in good health: if he continues to improve his morals as you have led me to hope, he will in future be not less dear to me than heretofore.  Be sure and let me see his letter by the first courier.
        Your father-in-law,
            PAUL FAGIUS, the elder.

LETTER CLIX. PAUL FAGIUS TO JOHN ULSTETTER.
Lambeth, the Palace
April 26, 1549
  Much health, my dearest son-in-law.  I doubt not but that you are very anxious to learn how and when we arrived in England.  You must know therefore, that on the eighteenth of April, under God’s guidance, we happily reached Calais the frontier sea-port of England, where we were obliged to remain till the twenty-third of the same month owing to the roughness of the sea.  On that day we crossed the channel, and reached London on the twenty-fifth.  We thence proceeded by water to Lambeth, the palace of the archbishop of Canterbury, who received us with the greatest kindness.  He wishes to send me to the university of Oxford, over which master Peter Martyr presides, for it is the most celebrated; and master Bucer to Cambridge.  But we are urgent with his grace not to separate us, but to allow us to remain together for some time, which will be a great comfort to us both.  We are however, still ignorant of our destination; for every thing is done by the king’s order.  May the Lord grant that, wherever we may be, we may approve ourselves unto him; which I request you to implore with us from him by fervent prayer.  I cannot at present give you any certain information about English affairs.  This however we have observed, that the harvest is plentious, but the laborers are very few.  Let us therefore entreat the Lord to send forth suitable laborers.  We found my son Paul at Canterbury in good health.  He has become well acquainted with the English language, and has a tolerable understanding of French; so that he now acts as my interpreter.  He has so conducted himself, as to gain the favorable opinion of good and learned men, which has cheered me exceedingly.  We are still remaining with the archbishop at Lambeth, in daily expectation of being sent to the post assigned us.  I request you again and again to acquaint me with the state of your affairs.  I hope we may shortly met.  Farewell, together with my very dear pledges, Sarah and Timothy.  Salute all my brother-ministers most dutifully from me, especially masters Erbius and Scriba.  In haste, from Lambeth, the palace of the archbishop, April 28, in the year of salvation 1549
          Your father-in-law,
            PAUL FAGIUS, the elder.
  Master Bucer, with Neglin and my son Paul desire their dutiful respects.

LETTER CLX. PAUL FAGIUS TO CONRAD HUBERT.
Croydon
May 7, 1549
  May the only-begotten Son of God preserve you, your wife, and all your family unto life eternal, my very dear brother in the Lord!  You will abundantly learn the present state of our affairs both from the letter of master Bucer, and the one I wrote to my wife, which I am very anxious for you to read.  On the first of May we removed from Lambeth to Croydon, where the archbishop generally passes the summer.  On the fifth of the same month we were taken to court, where access to the king’s majesty was granted us immediately after dinner.  I cannot express with what kindness we were received by him, as well as by the lord protector, and others of the nobility, and how he congratulated us upon our arrival.  This, indeed, exhilarated us beyond measure.  Though he is still very young, and very handsome, he gives for his age such wonderful proofs of his piety, as that the whole kingdom and all godly persons entertain the greatest hopes of him.  May our good and gracious God preserve him in safety many years, that he may be able to govern his kingdom long and happily, and at the same time to advance in various ways the kingdom of Christ, which we ought all of us to entreat for him from God with fervent prayers.  We hoped that we should very soon have gone to Cambridge, but the plan is altered.  For it seemed good to his majesty, the lord protector, and the archbishop, that we should translate the holy scriptures from the original sources into Latin, with some brief explanations of the difficult passages in each chapter, and the addition of summaries and parallel places.  All of which they wish afterwards to be translated into English, for the use of the preachers and people.  It is certainly a work of much labor; may God grant us strength!
  These things, my excellent brother, I wish briefly to acquaint you with: I pray you communicate them to my wife.  Every thing else you will learn from other letters.  Farewell, with all your household, and all our brethren in the ministry, especially masters Marbach, Lenglin, Christopher, Martin, and Udalric, and also master Andernach, together with their dear wives.  In haste, from the archbishop’s house at Croydon, May 7, 1549
              Yours wholly,
                PAUL FAGIUS, the elder.

LETTER CLXI. BERNARDINE OCHINUS TO WOLFGANG MUSCULUS.
London
July 17, 1548
  Greeting.  A letter has been brought me from Augsburg, in which are contained sad tidings respecting the state of the church and commonwealth.  For I am informed that the impious doctrine set forth by the emperor Charles has been received in many cities of Germany, some of whom influenced by fear, and others by foul superstition, had not courage to resist the ungodly edict.  And, indeed, this most heavy chastisement from God, which leads men’s minds into a denial of the truth, and into extreme destruction, is much more hurtful and calamitous than an internal and civil war could be to their bodies.  But among the other states which have arrived at this wretchedness, is mentioned that of Augsburg, which, impelled by the menaces of the emperor, is forced to receive that abominable Interim.  They write too respecting yourself, that as you were unable to maintain with integrity and fidelity the office to which you had been called, you had abandoned the city, and sought refuge in a place of greater security.  When therefore I made mention of your virtue and learning, and present misfortunes, to the most reverend the archbishop of Canterbury, he replied, that if you thought fit to come over into this country, he would provide you with some honorable means of subsistence.  I considered that I owed this service to our long friendship; and I recommend and exhort you, by my love for you, not to despise the vocation offered you, in which you will probably be employed with much greater usefulness than, under existing circumstances, in any part of Germany.  Farewell.  I could not but commend you to him, and point out of what great use you would be, if you would come hither; and he said that he would provide for you and for your family.  London, July 17, 1548
              BERNARDINE OCHINUS.

LETTER CLXII. BERNARDINE OCHINUS TO WOLFGANG MUSCULUS.
London
Dec. 23, 1548
  Greeting.  I gave your letter to the most reverend the archbishop of Canterbury, having read which, he declared himself exceedingly desirous that you should come hither: he said moreover, that there was but little hope of Upper Germany, and repeated his promise of providing every thing necessary for yourself and family.  He has commissioned a certain merchant, by name Richard Hilles, to supply you by his order with the money required for your journey, in case you should come.  You will receive, I think, the letter of this merchant together with mine.  I will add, that there are in London more than five thousand Germans, to whom you may preach and administer the sacraments; and if you wish to lecture at Cambridge, you will be able to do so.  All things, I hope, will be reformed.  I have now done my part; may Christ direct you!  My wife and daughter are well, and salute you with your wife and children.  Farewell, and remember me in Christ.  London, Dec. 23, 1548
              BERNARDINE OCHINUS.

LETTER CLXIII. WOLFGANG MUSCULUS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Berne
March 12, 1549
background: Extract of full letter
  . . . . . Bernardine (Ochinus) is inviting me to England by his letters, two of which I have now received dated on the 23rd and 31st December, to this effect: “I have shown your letter to the most reverend the archbishop of Canterbury, which when he had read, he most decidedly manifested his great desire that you should come to England, and he again confirmed what he had before promised.  But as you wrote that you had still some expectation in Germany, he immediately subjoined that such hopes were of a very slender nature; but that as you stated that you had a large family, and feared the expense would be greater than you could afford, he had been speaking to a certain merchant to supply you with every necessary.  He will send, I think, a hundred crowns for your journey.  Now if you require my sincere opinion, I recommend and exhort you to come.  A lectureship will be provided for you at Cambridge; and should not that situation meet your wishes, you might preach publicly in London, where a numerous auditory would not be wanting.  For there are more than five thousand Germans here, to whom you would doubtless be most acceptable.  I am therefore very desirous that, if you can do so without great inconvenience, you should come over as soon as possible.  I have nothing more to write about the archbishop, except that he is daily becoming more favorable to evangelical truth.  And though some reports of a contrary character have hitherto prevailed respecting him, he is now really showing himself to be a most godly person, and that he has nothing more at heart than that Christ should flourish and be triumphant.  We are therefore upon the most harmonious and friendly terms.”
  Thus far he.  As to myself, I have no thoughts of this invitation, unless (as I before wrote to Bernardine) there should not be afforded me an opportunity of serving Christ in Germany.  I am however very much pleased that the pure form of Christianity is daily more and more prevailing in that kingdom, which will doubtless receive many exiles flying thither for refuge.  Wherefore we must unceasingly pray God to put an end at length to that perilous war with Scotland, whence evils of no ordinary kind may arise to that kingdom, unless the mercy of God avert them.  Farewell, most illustrious sir.  Berne, March 12, 1549
            Yours in the Lord,
              W. MUSCULUS.

LETTER CLXIV. PETER OF PERUGIA TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Cambridge
Feb. 10, 1550
  Greeting.  Although I am personally unknown to you, most learned and accomplished Bullinger, this circumstance need not prevent me from addressing you with every feeling of affection and respect, and desiring to gratify you to the utmost of my power.  For I am not so ignorant as not to perceive the extent of those obligations which all those who, like myself, embrace the pure doctrines of the gospel, owe to you and others of the like character, by reason of those admirable exertions and services by which you have again purified the church of Christ itself, which had been miserably defiled by antichrist.  I pray you therefore, most godly Bullinger, to assure yourself of every service from me which a grateful pupil can render to his instructor, and which I would desire to prove to you rather from the active performance of them than from a mere verbal declaration.
  The state of England is at this time entirely tranquil, compared with what it was during the last year.  The duke of Somerset, who had been the king’s governor, and who was so ignominiously committed to the Tower of London, is now at length delivered by the divine blessing, and most honorably set at liberty.  And although he is deprived of his former office, he will nevertheless be able to live with honor and magnificence upon the revenues that they have left him.  You see therefore the wonderful mercy of God towards his elect: for from the beginning it was the general opinion that he would suffer death; but it has turned out far otherwise.  The gospel in this country is rather extending itself more widely than suffering any change.  Masters Bucer, Bernardine, and Peter Martyr, are most actively laboring in their ministry, and are indeed most useful.
  We have great hopes of a peace with France, although we do not yet know upon what terms it will be effected.  May our most gracious God grant that all things may turn out happily: and I earnestly pray him long to preserve yourself, together with masters Pellican, Bibliander, Gualter, Vergerius, and the whole church, to the glory of his name.  Master Bucer, who is now at the university of Cambridge, where he is lecturing with the greatest eloquence and godliness upon Paul’s Epistle to the Ephesians, most affectionately salutes you and your church.  Cambridge, February 10, 1550
          Your most attached and devoted,
                PETER of Perugia,
    an exile from Italy, his native country, by reason of his confession of the
    doctrine of the gospel.

LETTER CLXV. THOMAS NORTON TO JOHN CALVIN.
London
Nov. 13, 1552
  Having understood from your letter to master Richard, the preacher of the word here in the French church, that you were desirous to know what had become of the children of my late master, the duke of Somerset, the consideration of your kindness affected me with exceeding delight and satisfaction; and I seemed to recognize the kindly feeling of an excellent and truly Christian pastor, who do not account as unworthy of your remembrance and regard, in their present fallen state, those individuals who have been cast down from the pinnacle of prosperity on which they had formerly been placed.  Wherefore, although it may hardly seem to be within my province to answer for another, yet induced by the request of master Richard, partly because no one can give you more certain information upon this subject than myself, who am still attached to them, and partly because, from your most courteous reply to my last, I perceive that a letter of mine will not be unacceptable to you, I have thought fit to acquaint you in writing with their present circumstances.  After God had taken away from us the duke himself by the hand of the executioner, because, alarmed for his own life, he was reported to have plotted the destruction of certain others of the royal council; it was enacted in the collective assembly of the realm, (which from a French word we call a parliament, from the freedom of speech there allowed,) that himself and his sons by Anne his wife, who cannot be unknown to you, though you have never seen her, and whom he married upon the decease of his former wife Catharine, should be deprived of the dukedom, earldom, and barony, as it is called, and also of any other titles of honor bestowed by reason of services rendered to the state; and that they should be reduced to the lowest rank of nobility.  With respect to their maintenance, the following provision was made.  The eldest daughter Anne, with whom you have corresponded, has been married nearly three years to the earl of Warwick, son and heir of the duke of Northumberland, and is happily and honorably settled.  The other four, Margaret, Jane, Maria, and Catharine, are unmarried, and committed by the council to the care of their aunt, the widow of the lord Cromwell, to whom four hundred marks are yearly paid by the king for their maintenance, according to the act of parliament.  Each mark is worth thirteen shillings and fourpence.  The youngest daughter, Elizabeth, who is now in her second year, is with her aunt Smith, who lost her husband about four months since, and to whom in like manner a hundred marks are yearly assigned for her support.  To Edward, his son and heir, thirteen years old, and as it were the living image of his father, out of the estates which yielded annually to his father [ . . . . .] thousand pounds of our money, each of which is equivalent to four golden crowns, as they call them, there is reserved, by the same act of parliament, about two thousand four hundred pounds, more or less.  The surplus, with all the personality, was paid, as is wont, into the exchequer.  He, with his two brothers, Henry and Edward, the latter five years old, and the other twelve, is with the lord treasurer of England.  They are wards of the king, to whom, so long as they are under age, belongs the guardianship of noble orphans, and also the use, enjoyment, and management of their estates.  They are liberally educated, and have no other attendants or governors but those to whom they were entrusted by their father in his life-time.  Philip Gilgate, a worthy gentleman, is their governor, and I retain my old office of instructing them.  But you may perhaps feel uncomfortable at their residing in the house of that individual, the marquis of Winchester, of whose religion you may have been led, from the reports of others, to entertain a doubt.  This doubt, however, I am able to remove.  As far as I can perceive, he is a worthy and religious man, nor do I see in what respect he differs from us: so that, even supposing he were to think differently, which I do not believe to be the case, yet as he does not draw us aside, but even goes before us in religion by his own example, there is no danger; and still less so, because their minds are both strengthened by education, and fortified against popery by the presence of us who reside with them.  Their mother still remains in the prison, which we call the Tower of London.  As she is guarded there with great care, we are ignorant as to what she is doing, or for what offense she is suffering.  We hope, however, that she will shortly be set at liberty, because some parties are of opinion that she was not imprisoned for having committed a crime, but to prevent her from committing one; so that when they perceive that the government has no cause for alarm, they will doubtless restore her to her friends.  I now think that I have satisfied your inquires.  Wherefore, if I can only obtain this from you, that you will gratify me by writing again, I will cease to give you any further trouble.  Farewell.  London, Nov. 13
            Your much attached,
                THOMAS NORTON.

LETTER CLXVI. HIEROME MASSARIUS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Basle
Dec. 21, 1553
  I was lately at Strasburgh, where I saw and spoke to your son: I inquired after his health, and what company he kept.  He frequently visits master Zanchy, from whom I had an excellent account of the youth; and when I took my leave, I told him that I was about to go to Zurich, and that I would convey thither any letters he might have to send.  He gave me the enclosed, and at the same time requested me, should I meet with a courier at Basle, to forward them by him, as I told him that I intended to go to Berne previously to my visiting Zurich.  I therefore send them.  I shall leave this place for Berne in about four days, and after staying there two or three days, I shall proceed straight to Zurich, that I may enjoy the delightful society of you all for some little time.  But enough of this.  Masters Peter Martyr and Zanchy affectionately salute you.
  There is no good news from England.  We have heard by letter that the most godly archbishop of Canterbury is condemned, first of all to be hung, and then quartered as a traitor to the queen’s majesty.  All the sons of the duke of Northumberland have also been condemned, and those too of the duke of Suffolk, together with that same Jane who was proclaimed queen; but whether any of them have yet suffered, we do not certainly know.  The day before I left Strasburgh, all the baggage of Peter Martyr arrived there by the favor of God, and I hope that he will again obtain a most honorable appointment from the magistrates.  He had hired a house, which he was daily supplying with various furniture, in expectation of the aid and calling of the Lord.  Public prayers have been had every day for the English church; and it is ascertained that queen Mary, the sister of the emperor, is on her way to Calais, whither also that most ungodly Jezebel of England is about to come.  It is the general assertion that a marriage has taken place between the king of Spain and Jezebel; and though this was not allowed by the papal laws, it is said that the pope has consented to it upon this condition, that he himself be again recognized as the supreme head of the church in England.  We must therefore use diligent prayer on behalf of that miserable and almost ruined church.  Farewell, and love me, and salute, I pray you, master Gualter in my name.  Basle, December 21, 1553
            Yours heartily,
              HIEROME MASSARIUS.

LETTER CLXVII. JOHN BYRCHMAN TO HENRY BULLINGER.
unknown
Dec. 10, 1549
  Most accomplished master Bullinger, I have received your letter which was very gratifying to me: I should have answered it by my corrector [of the press] whom I sent to master Froschover, if I had received it sooner.  If master Froschover needed any exhortation, I could wish for your assistance in printing the English bible: my good friends in England are very importunate, and desirous of its completion.  For the emperor had strongly urged upon the English ambassadors the settling a form of religion agreeable to the Interimistic doctrine.  But upon due consideration they confirmed by public decrees throughout the kingdom the form established by master Bucer.  He had been attacked with very severe illness, but is now recovered, and in the enjoyment of great authority and estimation among the people of London.  I have not heard any thing of the Pole, Florian.  The maritime cities are urgent with those of Hamburgh, Lubeck, and Luneburgh, respecting an accommodation with the cities of Bremen and Magdeburgh; but nothing will be done, unless they come to an agreement about religion.  If your reverence has any thing to tell me about the newly elected pope, do not refuse me the information.  All persons here seem to be in doubt about him.  The emperor has changed his intention, and means to celebrate his birthday at Brussels.  He is preparing for a journey into Italy.  We are expecting your letter to our archbishop, and also your book, and that of Calvin.  Peter Martyr has published in forty-three pages his disputation concerning the sacrament of the eucharist, held at the university of Oxford in England.  I would have sent it, had I a messenger who was going to Basle.  I have given this letter to master Froschover, that he may arrange the finishing of the bible as soon as possible.  Salute all our friends.
              Yours heartily,
                JO. BYRCHMAN.

LETTER CLXVIII. WILLIAM SALKYNS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Nov. 26, 1554
  Having met with so opportune a messenger, most reverend father, to whom I might very conveniently entrust a letter for your reverence, I cannot very by any means neglect so favorable an occasion of writing; but will write by him according to my capacity, and detain your prudence, for the time you are reading this, from those matters of far greater importance, in which you are always occupied.  And herein I must pray you to excuse my freedom; for I can neither consign to oblivion the extreme kindness with which you entertained me when I was at Zurich, nor anywise refrain from speaking about my master in whose service I now am.  The former topic indeed demands a grateful recollection and remembrance, which I hope never to lay aside.  And of the latter my duty requires me to say somewhat at this time, and to endeavor now to obtain from your piety, by letter, what I could not so readily accomplish in words when I was with you.  For your telling me that from the long intimacy that formerly existed between you and my master, Richard Hilles, you felt inclined to write to him, has very often come into my mind since I left you.  For I thus thought with myself: if master Bullinger, who has so much influence, and is so famous for learning, would insert in the letter, which he intends to write to my master, a few words upon fleeing from the abomination of the mass, (by the frequenting of which in England my master is now placing his soul in jeopardy,) the result would be, that either convinced by his argument, or moved by ancient friendship, (which I know has very great weight with him,) he will yield to his exhortation above all others, and consider how he can flee away from such abominable idolatry.  I thought too, that your piety would perhaps effect this object without any hint from myself; but on account of my duty and obligation to my master, the love I bear him, and the great anxiety I shall labor under, until I see him extricated and delivered from these defilements, I could not but especially bear the matter in mind, and now, most reverend sir, recall it to your remembrance.  To which end I implore and entreat you by Almighty God, that when you write to him, you will not forget this; and I would wish you so to write, that no suspicion may fall upon myself as having persuaded you to do so.  But when you have finished what you have to say, I will take care that the letter shall be safely conveyed to him with all diligence.  Farewell.  May the great and gracious God long preserve your piety to his glory and the good of his church!  Strasburgh.  From the house of Peter Martyr, Nov. 26, 1554]
            Your most devoted,
              WILLIAM SALKYNS,
                 Servant of master Richard Hilles.

LETTER CLXIX. WILLIAM SALKYNS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Dec. 29, 1554
  Your two letters, revered father, written both to my master and to myself, I received, as the saying is, in the very nick of time; for to-morrow, God willing, I purpose to go to Antwerp, whence I will take care that your letters, which otherwise must have been given in charge to some one else, shall be conveniently and safely forwarded.  Your letters then were most gratifying to me on two accounts, both by reason of the opportuneness of their arrival, as also of the great and abundant advantage which I certainly hope will be the result.  And while I acknowledge this as a singular token of your kindness, so I doubt not but that the great and good God will abundantly recompense you, as it is far beyond my power.  But your wishes will be quite satisfied when your letter has answered the end for which you wrote it, and has produced that effect which we both of us so much desired, and which will be salutary to him.  In future, however, if you should kindly think fit to write to him, you can send it most conveniently to Christopher Goodman, at the house of master doctor Peter Martyr; and he will take care to forward it, whatever it be, to me at Antwerp.  I shall henceforth make use of his assistance, in communicating such news as may occur there, and which it may be desirable for you to know.
  Your reverence asks me for news from England: many events have occurred, though of a very painful and distressing character, yet such as the wisdom of God may make use of both for the setting forth of his glory, and the greater consolation of the godly in time to come.  Cardinal Pole, the legate of antichrist, was some time since received in England, after the popish fashion, with great pomp and solemnity, in the presence of Philip the Anglo-Spanish king, with his queen Mary, at Paul’s cross, a most celebrated place in the middle of London; where Gardiner, bishop of Winchester, preached a sermon before a great concourse of people of all ranks, in which with am impudent and shameless forehead he maintained the supremacy of the pope which he had formerly impugned, and asked forgiveness (as he said) for his previous error.  But when the cardinal addressed the queen, and no human language occurred to him worthy of such a woman, he did not scruple to pervert the holy language of scripture; but addressed the queen on his first interview in the same words with which the angel saluted the mother of God, and thus the monstrous flatterer begun:  “Hail, Mary, full of grace, &c.”  Shortly after they introduced the primacy of the pope, and proclaimed Pole archbishop of Canterbury, chief primate of England, and introduced him into the senate, or, as we say, the parliament, where the aforesaid bishop of Winchester demanded, with fox-like cunning, the pope’s pardon and indulgence for all the peers, who were then disgracefully prostrated at the feet of the cardinal, of which however he said they were wholly undeserving.  The queen is said for certain to be pregnant.  Philip is not yet crowned, nor is it thought that he will be during this parliament, which will shortly be dissolved, and a new one appointed in due time, in which the papists are in great confidence of obtaining the accomplishment of all that remains for them to wish for.  Many individuals are daily committed to prison, and the bishops are still confined in the same place.  I have heard from persons worthy of credit, and who have received the information by letter, that the emperor is about to go to Spain, and there wait for the last extremity; but that Philip will come to Flanders, and remain there.  This is what I now have to communicate.  Should I hear any thing more favorable, I will not fail to let you know.  Farewell, most reverend sir, and take in good part this my writing.  Strasburgh, Dec. 28
              W. S.

LETTER CLXX. FRANACIS DRYANDER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Cambridge
March 25, 1549
  Shortly before I left Strasburgh, I acquainted you with my intended journey.  I have not written in the mean while, as I had no opportunity of sending a letter; and I employed the greatest part of my time in traveling, a thing which was indeed very irksome to me, till at length, after being long tossed about, I have fixed my abode in this university, where I am Greek professor, in which situation I endeavor to bestow tolerable diligence and fidelity.  As I have now therefore some breathing-time, and an opportunity is afforded me of sending a letter by persons going to the Frankfort fair, I have resolved to write to you, that I may renew our ancient friendship, and give you a motive for writing in return.  I am indeed personally separated from you by a long distance, but in mind, in studies, in religious teaching, in which you excel, I have always ascribed to you the praise of integrity and faithfulness; and wherever I am, I do not fail to set them forth, as virtues which I find wanting in many other nations.  But I am of opinion that I am placed in this corner by the especial counsel of God, that I may be preserved for some space of time safe from those snares which tyrants laid for me, even when I was at Basle.  But I am in the hand of God, who can every where preserve his own; and I ought to render him this obedience, that I may always be ready to depart from hence, whenever I shall be summoned by our Captain.  With respect to the public state of this kingdom, you must know, that the parliament is just ended, in which I understand that, by the common act of both houses, the lord admiral, the brother of the lord protector, who was said to have been in various ways guilty of treason, was condemned, and he is also beheaded.  I hear also that a praiseworthy reformation has taken place in matters of religion: it has not yet seen the light, but its promulgation is daily expected.  It is generally reported that the mass is abolished, and liberty of marriage allowed to the clergy: which two I consider to be the principal heads of the entire reformation, the object of which, as I think, is not to form an entire body of Christian doctrine, and to deliver a fixed and positive opinion without any ambiguity upon each article, but is entirely directed to the right institution of public worship in churches.  I hear that there was a great dispute among the bishops about transubstantiation; all which things were managed in secret, like the mysteries of Eleusis, as it would have been impious to communicate such great mysteries to lay-men. I think however that, by a resolution not to be blamed, some puerilities have been still suffered to remain, lest the people should be offended by too great an innovation.  These however, trifling as they are, may shortly be amended.  But I can say nothing for certain, until I am better informed of the facts.  As soon as the act shall be published, I will send it you, if it be in Latin; if not, I will give you an account of every article.  You can relate these things to master Hooper, to whom I will now write, if time permit.  But I wish he would perform the duty he owes to his country, which is sadly distressed at this time for want of good preachers.  And in a calling the most honorable of all others, to lend one’s aid to the churches is the duty of a man not only of eminent talent, but of heroic courage; and I think he would do this with dignity.  Salute in my name master Pellican and the rest of the brethren, in whose prayers I desire the whole course of my life to be commended to God.  Farewell.  Cambridge, March 25, 1549
            Yours heartily,
              FRANCIS DRYANDER.

LETTER CLXXI. FRANCIS DRYANDER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Cambridge
June 5, 1549
  I wrote to you lately, before the reformation of the churches was publicly known.  A book has now been published, a month or two back, which the English churches received with the greatest satisfaction.  A compendium of this book written in Latin I send to master Vadian, on the condition of his communicating it to you.  You will see that the summary of doctrine cannot be found fault with, although certain ceremonies are retained in that book which may appear useless, and perhaps hurtful, unless a candid interpretation be put upon them.  But in the cause of religion, which is the most important of all in the whole world, I think that every kind of deception either by ambiguity or trickery of language is altogether unwarrantable.  You will also find something to blame in the matter of the Lord’s supper; for the book speaks very obscurely, and however you may try to explain it with candor, you cannot avoid great absurdity.  The reason is, that the bishops could not of a long time agree among themselves respecting this article, and it was a long and earnest dispute among them whether transubstantiation should be established or rejected.  You perceive therefore by this certain proof, that there are no true and solid principles of doctrine in these men, who take a great deal of pains about the most minute and even absurd matters, and neglect those points on which they ought chiefly to have bestowed their attention.  But this is the fate of the church, that the majority overpower the better part; and though many things may be improved, there are nevertheless some causes of offense still remaining.  Meanwhile this reformation must not be counted lightly of; in this kingdom especially, where these existed heretofore in the public formularies of doctrine true popery without the name.  Anabaptists, and other fanatical spirits, are now beginning to show themselves, and will occasion much trouble to the church; so that we shall ever be in this life under the cross and in a state of most painful disquiet.  Bucer and Paul Fagius have arrived here in safety.  They are at this present time in the palace of the archbishop of Canterbury, and will come hither within two months to give lectures in divinity.  I lately wrote to masters Bibliander and Gesner, whom salute diligently in my name, together with masters Pellican and Frisius.  Farewell.  Cambridge, June 5, 1549
            Yours heartily,
              FRANCIS DRYANDER.

LETTER CLXXII. FRANCIS DRYANDER TO JOACHIM VADIAN.
Cambridge
June 5, 1549
  Greeting.  As no possession in life is more valuable than the friendship of good men, it should be preserved and strengthened with great diligence; and no distance of place ought either to prevent the intercourse and connexion of the good, or to diminish their mutual good-will.  For my own part, indeed, most learned Vadian, I retain in mind the most entire and perfect remembrance of you, although you are absent, nor will the most delightful recollection of so dear a friend ever perish from my memory.  The same I ask from you, and by the right of kindness and friendship, which you cannot neglect without deserved reproof.  You have long since, I suppose, learned the state of things in this country from master Hierome: I now send you the public reformation of religious doctrine which has been effected in this kingdom; in which though you may desire a more judicious and attentive consideration of some important matters, you will nevertheless be tolerably satisfied with the true setting forth of the principal articles of religion.  I wish this letter to be communicated also to master Bullinger, that he too may understand, not from general report, but from the truth itself, the alteration that has taken place in England in respect to religion.  Should there be any more news, I will send you word.  The Germans are allowed to have their own church and preachers in London, where there are said to be four thousand of that nation.  Musculus could most ably undertake this ecclesiastical charge, to the great advantage both of himself and of the state.  I know what he replied to Bernardine’s letter, when he invited him to England in the name of the archbishop of Canterbury; and in my opinion he replied very prudently.  But I do not consider that the office of preaching and administration of the sacraments to his fellow countrymen would be attended with any inconvenience.  If he feels inclined to a situation of this kind, upon being informed of it I will point out the most eligible way.  But I write this for no other reason than because I wish well both to him and to the community.  Farewell, with all our godly friends, and let me have from your letters some certain information respecting the state of Switzerland.  Cambridge, June 5, 1549
        Yours heartily,
          FRANCIS DRYANDER.

LETTER CLXXIII. FRANCIS DRYANDER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Basle
Dec. 3, 1549
  As I hear many reports are here circulated no less painful than groundless, both respecting the realm of England itself, and also our own countrymen, who are professors of learning and religion in that country; I have thought it my duty to deliver you from all anxiety, as I have already done to the people of Basle.  It was the persuasion of many persons here, that Bernardine and Bucer had been apprehended together with the lord protector of the kingdom, and that with him the entire form of religion which they had established a short time before, had fallen to the ground.  But this is not the fact.  I was a spectator of the whole calamity, and not only I saw the external and wretched appearance of the charge; but the purposes of the leaders are well known to me, and I will, by God’s blessing, acquaint you with them in person, when the times shall be more quiet.  I affirm this, meanwhile, of Bernardine and Bucer, that in my opinion they never lived more happily or usefully than at this time.  For Bernardine employs his whole time in writing, and this too with a force and rapidity, as he tells me, beyond what he ever did before; and he has a son lately born, in whom he takes great delight.  Bucer is created regius professor of divinity, and, as he is now nearly restored to his former health, was to go to Cambridge a day or two after my departure.  I say too, that religion is now in a better condition than it was before the imprisonment of the protector.  For I have seen a public edict proclaimed by royal authority, and printed, in which is not only confirmed the reformation of which I sent you an account, but it declares that some other matters, yet untouched, shall be reformed according to the tenor of the gospel.  This is the truth; and on the fifth of November I was at Lambeth with the archbishop of Canterbury and Bucer, on which day both our public and private affairs were in the same state as I now describe.  What has taken place since I know not, nor do I think that either the people of Basle or Zurich can know.  For I came as quickly as any one could do, and for no other reason, but that I might publish here this winter what I had written in England, having meanwhile left my family at Cambridge; to whom, by God’s blessing, I shall return at the beginning of spring.  I wished you to know these things, as being the true state of the case.  I would write yet more, if time permitted, or I did not think it better to defer them till my arrival.  For I long to see you, whom I have always acknowledged, and in many places openly declared, to be true ministers of God; and to be refreshed with you by the mutual communication of our faith.  Salute all the brethren and the church at large in my name.  Farewell.  Basle, Dec. 3, 1549
          Yours heartily,
            FRANCIS DRYANDER.

LETTER CLXXIV. FRANCIS DRYANDER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
May 2, 1552
  Although I do not often write to you, I can truly declare that my regard for you is the same as ever.  And if I thought there were any occasion, I could prove this by a variety of reasons.  For both your eminent virtues and admirable doctrine deserve the perpetual favor of all good men, and teach honorable persons to make a prudent choice of characters whom they may love, and to retain their friendship.  And had not these troubles of war kept me at home, it was my intention to have visited you, and to have refreshed my mind, languishing as it is after long continued exertion, by communion with you.  But I must remain at my post, and together with the commonwealth encounter the danger that seems to be impending, unless it be by God’s mercy averted from us.  Since therefore the young Paul Fagius, the son of that most learned man of most honorable memory, is intending to go to Zurich, I determined to write you a short letter, to renew our ancient friendship, and to commend the youth to your friendly notice.  He has within these few days arrived from England, in which country he devoted himself to learning; and you may learn from him some particulars respecting the state of that kingdom, which would not perhaps be mentioned in your other correspondence.  And since schools here are not very numerous, he intends, by the advice of his friends, to enter himself at your school, to be there instructed in literature and religion.  You will provide therefore, with your usual kindness, that he may be placed in some good situation, where he may be able to make much progress both in learning and godliness.  He would wish to lodge with master Gualter, who would willingly, I think, afford him room in his house.  You will learn from the young man what is going on here; and if God shall grant us some tranquility, I will either come to you, or write more copiously.  Meanwhile, I only say that the prediction which you wrote me at Basle respecting Frisius, has turned out most true.  But I was deceived by the appearance of piety which I thought was in the man, since experience has taught me that nothing could be more impious than he was.  Salute in my name masters Pellican, Bibliander, Gesner, Lelius, and our other friends.  Farewell.  Strasburgh, May 2, 1552
          Yours heartily,
            FRANCIS DRYANDER.

LETTER CLXXV. FRANCIS WARNER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
July 8, 1543
  Grace and peace in the Lord!  When I heard from master Richard Hilles the great desire that you sometimes feel, most accomplished sir, to be informed of what is going on in foreign parts, and among our English more especially; and when he urged me to acquaint you by letter with the disgraceful events that have very lately taken place among my countrymen; I much hesitated to do so at first, as being well aware of the rashness of the undertaking in a man like me, of no learning or talent, presuming to address by letter you who have long been placed on so high a pinnacle of learning and popular reputation.  But after he had fully assured me of your easy access and courtesy of manners, exhibited towards persons even of the lowest station and condition of life; and when you had also yourself (in your last letter to him, wherein you so kindly salute me) afforded a sufficient evidence of your kindness; I am at length overpowered, and impelled both by his request and the state of existing circumstances to take upon myself this office.  For the fact itself seemed to both of us not unworthy of notice, and I considered it too very greatly to the interest of my countrymen and the church at large, that you, and those like you, should be acquainted with it.  For inasmuch as, with the Lord’s blessing, the most excellent means of protection are afforded to us by Almighty God against all storms of all times, one of which is your good opinion, the other, the imploring of divine aid; the relation of this tragedy may perhaps conduce in no ordinary degree to our obtaining both of these with more advantage and effect: inasmuch as when the enemies of the gospel are pointed out, and the devices, and weapons, and mode of attack of our adversaries are altogether laid open, it will be more easy to determine, upon due consideration, how to oppose them; and we shall also be more ardently excited to the conflict, when we know that such bitter and shameless opponents are yet remaining; and again, when we see before us the recent calamity of the church, we shall be greatly stirred up to implore form Christ in its behalf, a deliverance from these evils and anxieties; which may God of his good pleasure grant to it in due time!  Amen.
  But now to come to the thing itself: you will receive herewith enclosed a certain proclamation fixed up in public, in which the reading of holy scripture is forbidden to men of a certain rank.  I had intended to have translated this decree verbatim into Latin, and have done so, with the omission of some adulatory matter, as far as the thirteenth section; but when I had proceeded thus far, I perceived that for want of time, and by reason of my slowness in matters of business, I was unable to pursue my design as I had intended; (for the printed copy did not reach me till Thursday, when I was so engaged in other matters by reason of the fair, that I had hardly leisure to transcribe it;) so that I am obliged only to give you the sum and substance of the remaining sections.  It is now your place, with your wonted courtesy, to take these things in good part; and should there be any thing unpolished, obscure, or savoring of a solecism, (as there probably will be,) to excuse it.  Farewell.  You are saluted, together with your wife, by master Richard Hilles and his wife, from whom you will receive a pair of knives for your wife, which master Henry Falkner will deliver to you.  In haste.  Strasburgh, July 8, 1543]
          Yours,
            FRANCIS WARNER  , Anglus.

LETTER CLXXVI. THOMAS KNIGHT TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Venice
Jan. 23, 1547
  Health in Christ.  As I know, reverend and godly father, that you are not an ordinary acquaintance, but a most especial friend, of master Richard Hilles the Englishman; I have thought it right, in case the Englishman John Burcher, an inhabitant of your city, has not yet returned from his journey to England, to commit to your care this small portmanteau, that it may reach the aforesaid Richard with greater safety and dispatch.  Should you have paid any thing for the carriage, John Burcher will repay it upon his return.
  The gospel is daily preached here with greater purity than in any other places in Italy; and it is ordained by a decree of the senate, that a sermon shall be preached every day in the Palazzo maggiore, during the approaching Lent, a thing that has never been seen since the foundation of the city.  The number of the faithful is daily increasing more and more.  Your commentaries are daily becoming more esteemed by the Italians; and, were they not so bulky and expensive, no books would meet with a better sale.  It will be therefore an act of kindness on your part to continue writing, and to bring forth out of the treasures of your abundance those rare spiritual gifts for that little flock, hungry and thirsting as it is.  Should there be any news, you will obtain it from the bearer of this letter.  May the Lord, who has chosen you as our pious and faithful pastor, long happily preserve you to us, and grant that we may at length reach together the promised land!  Commend me, I earnestly pray you, to Christ, with your other friends.  Venice, Jan. 23, 1547
        Your humble son, and servant to command,
            THOMAS KNIGHT,  Anglus, Bookseller.
  P.S.  You will receive together with this parcel a cask marked with the name of Richard.  You will have the kindness to endeavor that it may be forwarded to him by means of some of your friends.  You will not receive the jar of figs at this present time, because there was not room for it in the carrier’s chest; so I only send you by him a small parcel marked with the two letters R. H.

LETTER CLXXVII. RICHARD MASTERS TO RODOLPH GUALTER.
Oxford
June 14, 1551
  Though I have not replied, my dear friend, to your so frequent appeals as well by your friendly letters, as by your repeated salutations, I cannot plead my occupations as an excuse for my not having performed that duty; but you must rather impute it to my being unaccustomed, not to say unskilled in writing, and not to any forgetfulness of you.  For I was afraid, unlearned as I am, to intrude upon a man so learned and accomplished as yourself with my unpolished letters.  At length, however, I have divested myself of this rustic shamefacedness, as I esteem your sincerity and candor more than I fear my own rudeness of style.  You request, and from your kindness towards me readily obtain, that I should inform you of my state and condition.  You must know then that, after the lapse of a year or two from your departure hence to your friends at home, a very lucrative benefice was procured for me, which, to speak plainly, because I was not well qualified for the function of a good clergyman, both from my want of sufficient acquaintance with the word of God, and of the duties connected therewith, and also because popery, however it was abolished in name, still flourished among us in reality, I decidedly refused, and resigned into the hands of the patron.  Since that time I have devoted myself for ten successive years to the study of medicine, and am now maintaining myself by the practice of it, having become, from a bad divine, a tolerably good physician, like the person mentioned by Augustine, as having become from a bad monk a good divine.  But I have not so entirely taken leave of theology, as not to welcome from my heart, value, and delight in, whatever the most godly Bullinger and his like-minded disciple, Gualter, may write.
  I had intended to have written to you long ago, but have been unable to do so from having been detained in my native place, and at a distance from Oxford, by a quartan ague of three months continuance; in addition to which, after I had recovered my usual health, my worthy father fell into the like disease, and at length died at the age of sixty.  John ab Ulmis, having lately met with an opportune messenger, at the same time that he informed me of him, has also reminded me of my promise, or rather of my duty; so that I could not allow him to come to you empty, and without a letter, which I doubt not will be gratifying to you, inasmuch as it has proceeded from a heart full of kindness, and which prays for you every happiness.  I was eagerly expecting the arrival of your relative, and hoping that from this circumstance some opportunity would arise of doing you a service: but as he is now traveling elsewhere, there is no means by which you can make experiment of my love towards you.  Your countrymen are in excellent health, and highly esteemed by all good men for their probity of life and conduct: among whom John ab Ulmis, who is as it were their leader, is removed from our society into the king’s college, and distinguished by the degree of bachelor in arts; and, I believe, will shortly take his master’s degree, so that he may now be called an incepting master.  This individual is a most active defender of the true religion, and a valiant opponent of that which is false; and is not only known to be such in college, but also at court, where he is placed in so honorable a situation by the marquis of Dorset, that it is easier to imagine than express, how greatly he values him for the sake of religion.  But now, as I am called away elsewhere, I must bid you farewell, and pray God long to preserve you in safety to his church.  Oxford, June 14, 1551
          Yours heartily,
            MASTERS.

LETTER CLXXVIII. AUGUSTINE BERNHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Baxterley
May 31, 1552
  Health in the Son of God!  Our friend John ab Ulmis being about to return to his native country, earnestly entreats me to write to you; and he is so urgent, that without being considered as regardless of my duty, or as wanting in gratitude, I am altogether unable to refuse compliance.  Your kindness to me, as long as I lived at Zurich with my most revered preceptor, master Wolfius, was exceeding great, and I am fully sensible of the obligation.  But I am now indebted to you more than ever, for your having so diligently and so lovingly commended my sister’s son Alexander to some noble personages.  I would have you, most learned sir, be entirely persuaded, that without any exception of time or place I shall never cease, as long as I live, my endeavors to promote your interests.  I should make this promise more at length, if I thought you could entertain any doubt of my sincerity and gratitude, or if I did not choose to prove it by deeds rather than by a bare assertion.  You will fully learn from my friend John my circumstances in life, and the nature of my studies.  My master, doctor Latimer, had intended to write to you, but he has to-morrow to undertake a long and arduous journey, so that the excellent old man, and your most loving friend, is unable to send you a letter at this time; but he especially commands me to salute you in his name as honorably and lovingly as possible.  Lastly, farewell, and continue your regard for us, namely, Alexander and myself.  May God the Father of mercy and loving-kindness faithfully reward you in the last day; and I heartily pray and beseech him long to preserve you in health and safety.  Again and again farewell.  Baxterley in England, May 21, 1552
          Your most attached,
            AUGUSTINE BERNHER.  Helvetus.

LETTER CLXXIX. MATTHEW PARKER AND WALTER HADDON TO THE GUARDIANS OF MARTIN BUCHER’S CHILDREN.
Cambridge
1551
  Forasmuch as master Martin Bucer, of happy memory, when he was dying, committed to our fidelity some particulars of his last will, and appointed us his executors; we, having had due regard to every thing, as far as time and circumstances allowed, have made so much progress in that business, as that we doubt not but that we have satisfied our duties and our consciences.  And should your worships desire any further information upon the case, you will easily ascertain the facts by an inspection of the respective portions into which the property has been divided.  But now, since the widow is about to be with you, we have transferred our authority to her; and we have no doubt but that as a mother she will love her children, and that as a wife she will observe inviolate the last will of her husband.  We therefore present her to you, together with all the property, and authority to administer the will; that, as we have applied all our diligence to the utmost, yours may follow, and guard this entire will of that worthy and most excellent man, master Bucer, perfect and inviolate in all its parts: this we ourselves have done to the extent of our power, and we feel persuaded that you will do the same.  If any other points require a separate consideration, they will appear in the minute accounts which we have made out for this purpose, that, as far as the hurry of Bucer’s wife’s departure has permitted us, we might leave the whole affair as clear as possible.  Farewell, our worthy masters in Christ.  In England, Cambridge, A.D. 1551
        Your worships’ loving friends,
            MATTHEW PARKER,
            WALTER HADDON.
  The Executors’ Account of Bucher’s Property"
  The total amount, exclusive of the things not sold or valued, as on the other side, is £380
  Various items are stated from whence this sum was obtained, as stipend, sale of library, &c.  Then two or three small legacies are set against this.  The account then proceeds as follows:
  Account of good which were not sold, but taken home.
    Two green carpets. Two long bolsters full of feathers. A red counterpane. All the vessels of tin, weighing xxiv lb. Five brazen pots. A large brass kettle.  Eight copper  covers.  A mortar.  Three copper shaving-pots.  Two pans of copper.  Four upper coverlets, with feathers.  Three large, and six smaller pillows.  Four bolsters.  Five counterpanes, two red, the others green.  Two green cloths for covering benches. Twenty-six pairs of sheets.  Twenty napkins.  Twenty-one towels.  Thirty table-cloths. Two black trunks, adapted for journeys.  Three long gowns.  Two shorter vests, one trimmed with fur.  Two pair of hose.  Three doublets.  A cloke.

LETTER CLXXX. THE WIDOW OF BUCEER TO ARCHBISHOP CRANMER.
unknown
April 20, 1552
  I heartily implore for your reverence the grace and favor of God the Father through our Lord Jesus Christ.  Although the rank and dignity of your reverence would greatly deter me from writing, yet the exceeding benefits bestowed by your reverence both upon my husband in his life-time, and on myself since his decease, prevent the possibility of my being silent, unless I would be branded with ingratitude.  But though I am unable to recount them as they deserve, or worthily to praise them, I nevertheless thank God, and daily implore him on behalf of your reverence, that he who is most rich and most powerful, may regard you with his unexhausted goodness and infinite beneficence.  I remember, most reverend prelate, that when I was yet in England, your reverence promised me some document in writing, whereby the gift of his most serene majesty would be confirmed to myself alone, and remain undivided: which indeed seems just and proper, forasmuch as the civil law and statutes allow of the division only of such property as is proved to have been in the possession of the testator previous to his decease; while that which is given after his death, ought of right to remain entire and inviolate to the party on whom it is bestowed.  Since therefore your reverence has promised me this document, and I am in hopes that by its authority and efficacy I may be able to obtain for myself and my little daughter, who very greatly needs it, the donation of his most serene majesty; I beg and implore your reverence to send it me either by Richard Hilles, or in any other way.  For if I can procure it, I am in hopes of retaining this donation for mine own use and that of my little girl, which otherwise cannot be effected as being contrary to the laws of our government.  But I would not have your reverence suspect that I am seeking this from any motives of avarice, or of envy towards the other heirs, but solely for this reason, that I may be able to aid and supply the slender means and wants of my little girl, who inherits the smallest portion of her father’s property, and who has scarcely sufficient to provide her with a decent education and the necessaries of life.  For the other children have mostly arrived at such an age, that (to say nothing of their having inherited a far greater patrimony than my little daughter) they may easily gain a livelihood for themselves.  Wherefore I again entreat your reverence, that you will take up this cause, and forward me the required document as soon as possible; for which favor, as for all others, you shall always find me grateful, and constantly praying God on your behalf.  May the Lord God deign to defend your reverence from all evil, and enrich you with all good things!  Amen.

LETTER CLXXXI. ULRIC CHELIUS AND CONRAD HUBERT TO MATTHEW PARKER AND WALTER HADDON.
Strasburgh
June 20, 1553
  We have to inform you, that after the return to us from England of the honorable matron Wibrandis, widow of the late excellent Martin Bucer, a careful account was taken of all the property that he left behind him; after which, according to the municipal law and custom of the state of Strasburgh, a division was made in favor of those parties to whom the inheritance belonged.  For which reason both of us having been nominated, I, Ulric Chelius, as guardian to Elizabeth, daughter of the said Martin Bucer, and I, Conrad Hubert, guardian of Nathanael, son of the said Martin Bucer, we acknowledge by this letter to have received that portion which is due to our wards, and to be divided between them by right of inheritance, and that we are therewith well satisfied.  Wherefore, reverend sirs, who are appointed executors by Martin Bucer, of happy memory, as far as we are concerned, we release you and others of your trust by this present acquittance, which we have sealed with our seals.  Moreover, both of us guardians, together with Windelicius Richelius, the trustee of the widow, most earnestly request your kindness to endeavor, with the same diligence that you have hitherto employed, that the remainder of the debt, which has duly been ascertained by us, may be discharged and forwarded to us at the earliest opportunity: by which you will do us a most acceptable service, and one which shall be requited in due time.  Farewell.  Strasburgh, June 20, 1553

LETTER CLXXXII. JULIUS TERENTIANUS TO JOHN [AB ULMIS.]
Strasburgh
Nov. 20, 1553
  To your very kind letter, my worthy John, which I received on the 18th of September, I now make a brief reply, as I am occupied by various engagements.  And first of all, as you desire, I will touch upon the state of England.  The most godly Josiah, our earthly hope, died on the 6th of July; of consumption, as the physicians assert; by poison, according to common report, for this is rumored by the papists for the purpose of exciting a general hatred against Northumberland: nor, to tell the truth, were there wanting many and strong suspicions: but still, if I may say what I think, I believe the papists themselves to have been the authors of so great wickedness; for they have expressed no signs of sorrow, and no inquiry has been made respecting so great a crime.  This death, and the other evils which now oppress England, were apparently portended by a dreadful storm, to which I do not remember any equal: it was accompanied by the most extreme darkness, most violent wind, innumerable flashes of lightning, terrible claps of thunder, and an immense body of water, so that our kitchen was entirely flooded.  The walnut-tree, planted in the corner at our house, was torn up by the roots, and another tree also was blown down in our garden.
  A few days before his death the king made a will at the instigation of Northumberland, by which he disinherited both his sisters, and appointed the lady Frances, wife of the duke of Suffolk, to be his heir.  She declined it, and the kingdom was made over to her daughter Jane, who had been married two months before to the lord Guilford, the third son of the duke of Northumberland.  Almost the whole of the nobility subscribed to this testament, some of them, as it was afterwards discovered, with the view of more easily deceiving Northumberland, by whose advice all these things appeared to be done, and of concealing the plot they were preparing in favor of Mary, who is now in possession of the crown: others added their names from fear of Northumberland, for you know the character of the man; and some of the better of them, with the hope of protecting religion, which they perceived would be altogether overthrown, should Mary obtain the crown; and Northumberland himself excited great expectations that he would favor religion.  In addition to this, the king himself in his will alleged as a reason for disinheriting Mary, besides her illegitimacy, the cause of religion.  In fine, he had the assent of almost the whole of the nobility: Jane is brought down to take possession of the Tower, and on the same day is proclaimed queen at London, and in the same week in many parts of the kingdom.  Mary, who had most faithful councilors, by their advice went, as though defenseless, into Norfolk, where she is received and hailed as queen with general applause.  She forthwith procures herself to be proclaimed queen in as many places as possible, in all of which it was stated that the kingdom was being wrested from her by the treachery of Northumberland; wherefore she enjoins all her subjects to preserve it to her.  Almost the entire nation rise to her assistance; first of all the people of Norfolk and Suffolk, and then those of Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Berkshire, and Esse A portion too of the nobility, who had given in their adhesion to Jane, merely for the purpose of deceiving her, revolt from her forthwith, and exert all their energies in behalf of Mary.  As to the Londoners, some of them through fear, and others through treachery, urge upon Northumberland the protection of the state, and the necessity of seizing upon Mary’s person before her forces can be assembled.  He therefore exerts himself like one whose fortunes are involved in the result, offers large pay, and engages a soldiery partly unwilling, and partly treacherous; for the consisted in great measure of the dependants of those noblemen who secretly espoused the cause of Mary.  Northumberland sets forth, well supplied with cavalry and artillery, which however were to be turned against him.  Those who remained at London, as though for the purpose of protecting Jane and retaining the city in its allegiance, begin forthwith to consult about deserting her; for which they plausibly allege, partly their fear of the people, all of whom are flocking to Mary, and partly the well-being of the kingdom, lest it should suffer from intestine war.  Why should I say more?  They immediately proclaim queen Mary, with general applause, and threaten with death the duke of Suffolk, in case he refuses to leave the Tower.  The good duke yields.  They write to Northumberland to dismiss his troops; and being now forsaken by the people, and betrayed by others, not knowing what to do, with his soldiers deserting every day, he proclaims queen Mary at Cambridge, and three days after is carried prisoner in her name by the earl of Arundel, together with all his sons and many other noble and influential personages, to London, where he was received with unbounded abuse on his way to the Tower.
  Thus Jane was queen for only nine days, and those most turbulent ones.  After some days Mary made her entry with great triumph into the city, to take possession of the Tower; on entering which she immediately set at liberty the bishop of Winchester, the duke of Norfolk, lord Courtney, and the widow of the duke of Somerset.  She enrolled the bishop of Winchester and the duke of Norfolk among her councilors.  The case of Northumberland and the other prisoners was then brought forward.  But after five days the queen removed to Richmond, during which time Northumberland and two others were executed.  You have heard of the ungodly and shameful end of Northumberland.  The most godly king is buried; the good archbishop of Canterbury performs the funeral service at Westminster according to the established form, that is, in English, or in a  Christian way, with many tears; but before the queen Winchester himself performs the obsequies after the popish fashion.  Our preachers, who now perceive the gospel is threatened with imminent destruction, exhort the people to repentance, admonishing them to persevere in sound doctrine.  Winchester, in conjunction with other parties who had together meditated the overthrow of the gospel, appoints a most thorough papist, of the name of Bourn, as preacher at Paul’s cross.  A great multitude is assembled to hear what he intends to say.  As soon as they hear his blasphemies and falsehoods, they begin to raise a tumult; some of them demanding capital punishment for the man, and others calling out for silence.  The lord mayor and some of the aldermen endeavor to quiet the people, but without any effect.  Courtney interposes his authority, but is disregarded.  Bradford himself comes forth in alarm; but the mob immediately cheer him, and promise silence, because he is a faithful preacher of the word.  Some one in the mean time hurls a dagger at that popish preacher, when the mob becomes again excited; and it would have been all over with that wicked knave, had not God by Bradford’s instrumentality reserved him to a worse fate.  But what thanks do you suppose were given to Bradford for so noble an action?  Truly such as might have been expected from monsters of this kind.  On the next day he was thrown into the Tower, upon no other charge but that, as he could so easily disperse the mob, he must have had some hand in exciting it.  Some other preachers are also thrown into the same prison; all preaching is forbidden, and the place is wholly left to papists, who are surrounded by the queen’s guard, that they may safely pour forth their poison; and all persons are prohibited from coming near Paul’s cross, for fear of raising a fresh disturbance.  And because in London there seemed to be some likelihood of a tumult, word was sent by the queen to the lord mayor, that he must either keep the city quiet himself, or that they must look for a guard of soldiers and the deprivation of all their privileges.  Then every family, especially of the gospellers, was in great distress.  The queen, partly with a view of ascertaining the popular feeling, and partly for the encouragement for her partizans, sets forth a proclamation, in which she declares her adherence to, and protection and support of, popery, and exhorts all persons to conform to it; but nevertheless at that time she would compel no one to embrace it.
  The papists, who had been always longing for this most wished for day, dig out as it were from their graves their vestments, chalices, and portasses, and begin mass with all speed.  In thee things our Oxford folk lead the van; and respecting them I must tell you a little farther.  At the proclamation of Mary, even before she was proclaimed at London, and when the event was still doubtful, they gave such demonstrations of joy, as to spare nothing.  They first of all made so much noise all the day long with clapping their hands, that it seems still to linger in my ears; they then, even the poorest of them, made voluntary subscriptions, and mutually exhorted each other to maintain the cause of Mary; lastly, at night they had a public festival, and threatened flames, hanging, the gallows and drowning, to all the gospellers.
  Master Peter Martyr is forbidden to leave his house; and Sidall, a truly excellent man, is ordered to guard against his running away; and thus master Peter has had his own house made a prison of these six weeks.  But I, perceiving that the danger was manifest, went to London to seek assistance from my friends.  They were now reduced to a very small number, and were so far from being able to assist us, that they were exposed to the greatest peril themselves.  Whittingham and I conceive the project of presenting a petition to the queen and council, in which we embrace the entire circumstances of master Peter; how he had been invited over from Strasburgh by the deceased king, and had been recalled by the magistrates of Strasburgh during the last year, but that the king would not give him license to depart; that the correspondence relative to all these facts was in the royal archives, and that, moreover, many of the council could bear abundant testimony to their truth.  We added, that master Peter had committed no offense either against the queen or the laws of the realm; that if his enemies chose to bring any charge against him, he was prepared to meet it; that he now perceived that the queen had no longer occasion for his services, and therefore he petitioned her for a license to enable him to leave the kingdom.  Whittingham and I proceed to Richmond; he presents the petition respecting Peter to the secretary, who, as is customary, lays it on the council table, and bids us wait.  On that day nothing was done, we are ordered to come again on the morrow; we are there at the hour appointed, but still nothing is done.  We feel at last that we are imposed upon.  We agree therefore among ourselves, that Whittingham should return to Oxford and remain with master Peter; for he was now almost entirely by himself, since every one, except only Sidall and master Haddon, had withdrawn from his society.  As to me, I remain in London to make what interest I can.  At length Whittingham returns after some days: e both of us wait upon [sir John] Mason, who at first declined interposing in so disagreeable a case, and said that he was altogether out of favor; afterwards however he was urgent that master Peter might be allowed to come to London, and plead his cause before the council.  He obtains his request, and we have moreover permission to remove all our goods.  Master Peter comes to London.  He calls upon the archbishop of Canterbury, his ancient and most revered host.  Who can express how welcome he was?  He had so earnestly wished for his coming, that he had often importuned the council to that effect, and offered to give all his property as a security, if they had any fear of master Peter’s running away.  When master Peter arrives, [the archbishop of] Canterbury tells him how he had caused bills to be posted all over London, in which he offers to prove that the doctrine, which was received in the time of Edward the sixth, is sound, agreeable to scripture, the same with that of the primitive church, and approved by the authority of the ancient fathers, if only they will allow Peter Martyr, and one or two others, to be his colleagues.  Master Peter commends this act, and says that had it not been done, he had intended to propose it to him.  They prepare themselves for the disputations.  But you should know, that the popish preachers, when they perceived that many of our priests were already cast into prison, and that others had consulted their safety by flight, made a great boast about disputing with us.  But when the placards of the archbishop were posted up, they began to change their note, and said that no disputation ought to take place; that they would abide by the received doctrine; that this was a matter in which faith, and not reason, was concerned.  But those placards of the archbishop so strengthened the spirits of the gospelles, that they no longer hesitated to lay down their lives for the truth; but their enemies were so exasperated by them, that they instantly brought forward a new charge of treason against the archbishop, and cited him into court, on what day of September I do not recollect, but I know it happened on a Thursday.  Master Peter then dined with the archbishop, who after dinner came into his chamber, and informed him that he himself must of necessity abide a trial; and that it was certain that he should never see him again:  he recommended Martyr to be urgent for his passports, on obtaining which he should depart; but should he fail in obtaining them, he must consult his safety by flight, for that no justice was to be expected from his adversaries.  But, O God! who can explore the depth of thy counsels?  About five days after the archbishop of Canterbury had been committed to the Tower, a safe conduct, and a most honorable one, was given by the queen to master Peter; who therefore, on the public guarantee, at the persuasion of his other friends, and also bearing in mind the words of the archbishop, commits himself to sea, spreading a report that he was going to Hamburg, when in reality he was proceeding to Antwerp.  This he did, to escape the snares of the papists in the dominions of the emperor; and to deceive them more effectually, he wished me to remain some days in London.  Meanwhile, after a fortnight’s time, having obtained a wind, I set sail towards Antwerp; and on the same day both master Peter and myself arrived at Antwerp in different ships, each of us being ignorant of the other’s arrival; which was indeed remarkable, for I thought that he had by this time almost reached Strasburgh.  But I think that God intended to relieve us from our mutual anxiety, and moreover, to provide for my expenses.  I will not however mention what perils we escaped of the pestilence, of the troops, and of the Rhine; and also what mild weather we had in our journey as far as Strasburgh, whereby any one might conclude that God had certainly recalled us thither.  But just as we entered the city, James Sturmius, who was waiting for nothing else than the arrival of master Peter, departed this life, and thus we were disappointed of our hope.
  But to return to England.  During this disturbed state of the kingdom, these persons, namely, lords spiritual, were thrown into the Tower; the archbishops of Canterbury and York, the bishop of London, Latimer, Hooper, Coverdale, and the bishop of Bath.  Ponet, bishop of Winchester, and Scory, bishop of Chichester, are also deprived of their bishopricks.  The bishops of Ely, Lincoln, and Hereford are removed from parliament; and all the married clergy must either relinquish their wives, or be deprived of their benefices.  Master Cox is stripped of all his preferment; Marshal has succeeded him at Oxford, and Weston at Westminister.  What must we not expect when such men are promoted?  Moreover, all the papists, whether bishops or others, are restored.  As many as are really godly students at Oxford, have all bidden farewell to that place, and some have already been ejected from our college.  The fire of purgatory is now really kindled in England, and the nature of every one’s faith is now made manifest.  Curtop has wonderfully fallen away; and so has Harding, with numberless others.  But the bare mention of this is too painful.  The queen was crowned on the twenty-eighth of September.  They began parliament on the first of October: transubstantiation was revived; but where is the wonder? no room is left for truth.  The deans made a strenuous resistance: their names do not occur to me.  Moreover it was enacted in parliament, that on the twentieth of October the popish mass should every where be publicly restored.  On November the fourteenth Jane, formerly queen, together with the archbishop of Canterbury and all the sons of the duke of Northumberland, was arraigned before the judges at Whitehall: you know the place at London.  Sentence of death was pronounced upon them all: but a peculiar punishment is intended for the archbishop of Canterbury, namely, hanging, and afterwards the dividing of his body into four parts.  But we must expect things yet more atrocious, unless God in his mercy look upon that church, on behalf of which I do not think I have any need to request your prayers; for you know from your own experience, how excellent are the members of Christ in that country.  Farewell. Nov. 20, 1553  Strasburgh.
          Yours in the Lord,
            JULIUS TERENTIANUS.

LETTER CLXXXIII. MICHAEL RENIGER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
unknown
unknown
  Notwithstanding, honored sir, such is the perplexity and pressure of your engagements, that you can scarcely obtain any relaxation from your most important avocations; yet since your kindness and indulgence towards us all is such, that you consider the management and arrangement of our affairs to be a part of your own duty, I have made bold, both from the necessity of the case, and the persuasion of your good-will towards us, to address you by letter.  And lest it should occasion you any surprise, that when our houses are so near as almost to be united, I prefer addressing you through the intervention of a letter, rather than by a personal conference, you must account for it in this manner; that I have still about me a kind of foolish shamefacedness, which shrinks from any discourse and conversation concerning my private affairs; and also, that the person who is the bearer of this s able to explain all the feelings of my mind just as if I were present myself.  Your kindness will thus briefly understand the whole matter.  Master Burcher, at the persuasion of one of my friends, presented me with twenty florins a year.  This assistance I did not think proper to decline, though I still continued to live together with the English [exiles;] first, because a necessity was imposed upon me to receive it: for a certain agreement and regulation was established among us, that each individual should exert himself among his relatives and friends to procure for himself such a livelihood and means of support, that admission might be afforded in their room to the more indigent English who might be at Strasburgh; on which account these means of support were not to be rejected by me, both by reason of the force of that obligation, and from a regard to others.  Added to this, the offer was such, and so exceedingly liberal, that it was not consistent with my candor or gratitude to refuse it: and in the third place it affords great assistance to the advancement and convenience of my studies.  In a word, I applied to master Richard [Hilles,] that, since this allowance was scarcely sufficient for my maintenance, he would make some addition from the general fund: he replied, in my opinion reasonably enough, that the doing so would introduce a most dangerous precedent to the whole society, and that other persons, from any quarter, would claim a like addition for themselves.  I then asked him, whether I might be allowed to write to some of my friends and connexions, who are merchants, respecting their affording such increase of allowance as might be necessary; but he thought also that I could not do this without injury to the society.    Being shut out from these means of support, I had communication with that most friendly man, master ab Ulmis, by reason of the intimacy which has so long existed between us: the result of which, most accomplished sir, is, that having tried and explored all possible methods, we have discovered this last resource; for it would savor of too much want of moderation, and intolerable importunity, to expect any increase of allowance from master Burcher, who has, besides, written very doubtfully respecting his own affairs, and that he would continue this pension some time hence, should his circumstances admit.  It has occurred to us, that master Vergerius has addressed us with so much affection and sincerity of heart, as to manifest that he was ready not only to do every service in his power to all in general, but also individually to such as may be willing to make trial of his kindness.  When we had thought this over together, it occurred to us that we should derive little benefit without the interposition of a letter from you: which I mention on this account, because master ab Ulmis with his usual kindness and good-will towards every one, and especially to myself, is not satisfied with regarding himself as the guardian of my affairs, but is also ready (if only you think it will be of any use) to undergo with me both the trouble of the journey, and the soliciting and management of the business.
  The matter now rests with yourself, to whom, as the patron of the miserable men now exiled from England, application has often been made before now, and is now made by myself under like circumstances; and to whom also any thing, whatever it may be, which may procure any alleviation to our misfortunes, is not wont to appear troublesome; that your prudence may ascertain, first, whether it is expedient to try this plan, and in the next place, may aid me, as far as you conveniently can do, with your advice and assistance.  This is a short statement.  I know how foolish it is to use prolixity with one who is more moved by his own kind feeling and desire to do good than by any private partiality or circumlocution.  May the Lord Jesus preserve you to his church, and repay to you out of his riches that kindness with which you daily refresh the bowels of the saints!
      Your most attached in Christ,   MICHAEL RENIGER.  Anglus.

LETTER CCLXI MARTIN MICRONIUS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
May 28, 1550.
  Much health.  Though I have been, most worthy sir, more negligent in writing to you than I ought to have been, I am nevertheless unwilling to repeat what I wrote on the 20th of May, lest I should be troublesome to you, who are already more than sufficiently occupied by important public and private engagements.  The cause of Christ remains, by the blessing of God, in the same favorable state: meanwhile, however, the old serpent ceases not his stealthy attacks upon the heel of Christ; notwithstanding his head is often bruised by the power and help of God.  We are apprehensive of mischief from that Flandro-Spanish machination.  He has, I hear, a well equipped fleet; but what he intends to do, God knows.  The illustrious lord à Lasco told me, four days since, that he had learned for certain, that the Spanish fleet had been dispersed and destroyed by a storm; and that this circumstance has detained the emperor in Lower Germany.  A firm peace is expected to take place between England and France.  A French nobleman, by name the Lord Châtillon, came over on the 23rd of May, and publicly confirmed the peace by oath on the 25th of the same month.  God grant it may be a sure and lasting one!
  Master Hooper is overwhelmed by so much business arising from his new bishoprick, that he has no time for lecturing in public, much less for writing letters. Wherefore he deserves every excuse, if he seldom or never writes them.  Some of the council lately proposed certain articles for him to subscribe to, but he excepted against three of them.  One is, that the sacraments confer grace.  He wished the word confer to be changed into “seal or testify to.”  The second is, that the book set forth by the bishops must be diligently observed in every particular, without any alteration whatever.  The last is, wherein he is required to approve the book of ordination of ministers of the church.  What will be the result, I do not know.  Within these three or four days he is about to take a journey to his native place.  His most excellent wife and little girl are in good health, as is also Joanna; and they send their best respects to you, and all your family.
  I wrote in a former letter about a certain Zuricher, of the name of Valentine Werdmuller, who was in prison, and under sentence of death; but who is now discharged by the beneficence of the kind.  We are surprised at not having received any answer respecting him; for we are afraid of some deception.  Meanwhile, we have been scraping together, as far as we can, charitable contributions for his ransom.  But the amount is too great for us Flemish foreigners to collect without inconvenience; since, beyond my expectation, we shall have to pay about six pounds, that is, nineteen crowns, and we are few in number, and for the most part poor.  If his parents are able, we hope they will send a sum of money that he may soon be set at liberty, as one of their kinsmen has told me will be the case.  Master John Ullenson, who is now living with Master Hooper, salutes you.
  Just as I am about to close this letter, a man worthy of credit has come to me, and states that the king has this day given orders for six of the largest ships to be furnished with all munitions of war.  But what is to be their destination, no one as yet know.  Entreat God on behalf of his church, now sold by the Spanish antichrist.  Salute, if you please, in my name, my most reverend preceptors, masters Theodore Bibliander, Conrad Pellican, Gesner, and the other worthy persons.  London, May 28, 1550.
            Your much attached,
              MARTIN MICRONIUS.

LETTER CCLXII. MARTIN MICRONIUS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
June 4, 1550.
  Much health.  As I know you are very anxious to hear about our affairs, I am unwilling to be negligent, but shall continue so to write to your reverence, that you may be as accurately acquainted with what is going on here, as if you were yourself present.  I should not take upon me this office, if master Hooper had leisure to write; for he could afford you more abundant and certain information.  I only write what I know undoubtedly to be facts.  As to those six men of war that I wrote about in my last letter of May 28, I understand there is no apprehension whatever.  The lord Châtillon, the French ambassador, having ratified the peace, will leave this country on the 2nd of June.  Master Hooper has obtained from the king’s councilors all he wished for: he is gone to his native place, whence he will return in about ten days, and shortly after go to his bishoprick, where master John Utenhovius is in expectation of meeting him.  I shall remain in London, to undertake the ministry of the word in the Flemish church that has been established here by master John à Lasco.  I am not quite certain that such a church will be granted; nevertheless we are in great hopes of it.  Should I be appointed minister to that church, I shall not be able with a good conscience to go down to master Hooper.  May God do what seems him good, provided only I labor for his glory!  Joanna, the attendant of mistress Hooper, was married on the 2nd of June to the French preacher, a worthy and learned man.  I wish them every happiness.  On the third of this month, too, was celebrated a marriage between the daughter of the duke of Somerset, and the son of the earl of Warwick, at which the king himself was present.  This event, I hope, will wonderfully unite and conciliate the friendship of those noblemen.  master John Utenhovius, a man illustrious by piety and descent, desired me to commend him to you.  Farewell, most noble sir, and salute all our godly friends in my name.
  What I principally intended to write had almost slipped my  memory, namely, that master John à Laso will shortly go to Cambridge, for the sake of having a conference with Bucer.  I pray God that some godly way may be discovered of reconciling the points on which they differ.  London, 1550.  June 4.
        Yours from my heart,
            MARTIN MICRONIUS.

LETTER CCLXIII. MARTIN MICRONIUS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
Aug. 28, 1550.
  Much health.  Master Hooper, most vigilant prelate, received your letter on the 22nd of this month; but whenever I exhorted him to send an answer, he replied, that he had determined to be silent until the settlement of this business of his about the bishoprick.  But as I know that from your especial affection to the king, the church of England, and to Hooper himself, you are exceedingly anxious to know what is going on here, though you might obtain fuller information from others, yet I have thought it my duty to relate it, while Hooper is in the mean time settling his own affairs, which are of great importance, and, as it appears, of doubtful issue.  The king, as you know, has nominated him to the bishoprick of Gloucester, which however he refused to accept, unless he could be altogether relieved from all appearance of popish superstition.  Here then a question immediately arises as to the form of the oath, which the bishops have ordered to be taken in the name of God, the saints, and the gospels; which impious oath Hooper positively refused to take.  So when he appeared before the king in the presence of the council, Hopper convinced the king by many arguments that the oath should be taken in the name of God alone, who knows the heart.  This took place on the 20th of July.  It was so agreeable to the godly king, that with his own pen he erased the clause of the oath which sanctioned swearing by any creatures.  Nothing could be more godly than this act, or more worthy of a Christian king.  When this was done, there remained the form of episcopal consecration, which, as lately prescribed by the bishops in parliament, differs but little from the popish one.  Hooper therefore obtained a letter from the king to the archbishop of Canterbury, that he might be consecrated without superstition.  But he gained nothing by this, as he was referred from the archbishop of Canterbury to the bishop of London, who refused to use any other form of consecration than that which had been prescribed by parliament.  Thus the bishops mutually endeavor that none of their glory shall depart.  A few days after, on the 30th of July, Hooper obtained leave from the king and his council to be consecrated by the bishop of London without any superstition.  He replied that he would shortly send an answer either to the council or to Hooper.  While, therefore, Hooper was expecting the bishop’s answer, the latter went to court, and alienated the minds of the council from Hooper, making light of the use of the vestments and the like in the church, and calling them mere matters of indifference.  Many were so convinced by him that they would hardly listen to Hooper’s defense, when he came into court shortly after.  He therefore requested them, that if they would not hear him speak, they would at least think proper to hear and read his written apology.  His request was granted: wherefore he delivered to the king’s councilors, in writing, his opinion respecting the discontinuance of the use of the vestments and the like puerilities.  And if the bishop cannot satisfy the king with other reasons, Hooper will gain the victory.  We are daily expecting the termination of this controversy, which is only conducted between individuals, either by conference or by letter, for fear of any tumult being excited among the ignorant.  You see in what a state the affairs of the church would be, if they were left to the bishops, even to the best of them.
  Blessed be God, who has bestowed upon England a discreet and godly kind, who most diligently purifies and gathers together the church of Christ.  By his favor the church that was formerly the Augustines’ has been made over to the German and French foreigners, that they may have the pure ministry of the word and sacraments, according to the apostolic form.  We are altogether exempted, by the letters patent of the king and council, from the jurisdiction of the bishops.  To each church (I mean the German and French) are assigned by the king two ministers of the word, (among whom is my unworthy self,) over whom has been appointed superintendent the most illustrious John à Lasco; by whose aid alone, under God, we foreigners have arrived at our present state of pure religion.  Some of the bishops, and especially the bishop of London, with certain others, are opposed to our design; but I hope their opposition will be ineffectual.  The archbishop of Canterbury, the especial patron of the foreigners, has been the chief support and promoter of our church, to the great astonishment of some; but God can make use of all persons to the advancement of his glory.  He has lately published a large volume upon the Lord’s supper, in which he strenuously opposes the corporal presence of Christ.  Bucer was advised, some little time since, by our superintendent, master à Lasco, not to raise any disturbance respecting the sacramentary controversy; and modestly replied, that he had no intention of the kind, but that he hoped that, were he present, he should easily agree with him.  Wherefore the superintendent is shortly about to visit him for the sake of a conference.
  The emperor privately sent to England in July a certain Scepper, one of his principal councilors, for the purpose of carrying away the king’s eldest sister, Mary; but, by God’s blessing, the thing was discovered and prevented.  Unless God had watched over his people, it would have been all over with them.  The same Spanish tyrant is harassing the Low Countries with the most cruel persecutions.  He has established the most sanguinary Spanish inquisition, which drives our countrymen to seek refuge in England.  May God preserve his church!  We commend our English church and that of the foreigners to your united prayers.  The book you sent to the king was very acceptable.  Master John Utenhovius salutes all of you who are ministers of the church, to whom also I commend myself.  London, Aug. 28, 1550.
          Your servant to command,
              MARTIN MICRONIUS.
  While these worthy men are waiting for a favorable wind to cross over, something has occurred respecting our foreigners’ church.  The church assigned to us by the king is being carefully repaired at the royal expense, through the instrumentality of the lord treasurer, to whom the choir of the said church belonged.  But as the repairs went on slowly, master à Lasco requested the key of the church to be given us, that we might be able to have a sermon there at least every Lord’s day.  But this was refused by the lord treasurer on the plea that the church was the king’s gift, and could not therefore be given up to us until it had been handsomely decorated.  Speaking also upon our liberty in respect to ceremonies, he inquired why we chose to have them different from the English, since the English ones are not repugnant to the word of God.  At last, when they had talked a good deal about ceremonies, the treasurer concluded by stating, that we foreigners must either adopt the English ceremonies, or disprove them by the word of God.  All this mischief is stirred up against us by the bishops, and especially by the bishop of London, who does us the more harm, in proportion as he seems more actively to support the word of God.  The lord treasurer is the mouth-piece of the bishops in this business.  You know what a difficult work it is to build up the nation of Christ.  We need the prayers of all godly persons; for it is “not by might, nor by power, but by my Sprit,” says the Lord.  Again, farewell.  Aug. 31, 1550.
              The same as above.
  We are much surprised at not having received any answer respecting Valentine Werdmuller; whether he is of the family of the treasurer of Zurich, as he would have us believe, or not.  We have certainly incurred conside4rable expense in getting him out of danger.  If his parents are the persons whom he states them to be, I hope that the sum we have expended on him will be repaid for the benefit of our poor.

LETTER CCLXIV. MARTIN MICRONIUS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
Oct. 13, 1550.
  Much health.  I have received, most vigilant pastor, your very kind letter, in which among other things you complain of not having received all that I have written to you.  If the couriers had not deceived me, you would have learned my great anxiety to make you acquainted with the state of the church of England.  Though I have no doubt but that every thing which occurs here is reported to you by others of great authority and credit, it is nevertheless a pleasure to me to testify in some measure my gratitude to you and to your church; which I cannot do by any other means than by faithfully laying before you the condition of our own, as you are doubtless exceedingly anxious for its welfare.  It is, thank God, in a better condition than ever: God grant it may last!  We have obtained, through the activity of our superintendent, master à Lasco, the church of the foreigners, (which is divided into a French and a Ge4rman church,) free from all superstition.  The church which was assigned to foreigners by the king and his council is cleansed and repaired.  But as the reparation of the church was being protracted day after day to a lengthened period; by the special blessing of God a church has been made over to us Germans by the favor of some citizens of London, in which we are allowed to preach till the other is completed.  At the desire of the brethren I have been appointed preacher, and have unwillingly taken upon myself that most difficult office.  But the call of God must not rashly be resisted.  I began to preach in this church on the 21st of September, and the German congregation is now so numerous that the place will not hold them.  When we perceived this happy condition of our church a consultation took place among our countrymen as to the establishment of a regular plan of government.  Therefore, on the 5th of this month, we appointed four elders, according to the apostolic ordinance, to assist the minister, not indeed in the ministry of the word, but in the conservation of doctrine and morals in the church.  The most illustrious master John Utenhovius is one of the number.  They were inaugurated with public prayer and imposition of hands.  On the twelfth of this month we in like manner ordained four deacons, to take the charge of the poor and exiled for Christ’s sake.  The same ceremony was altogether adopted which the apostles observed with their deacons.  The multitude of believers (praised be God!) is increasing every day.  Should we be permitted, by God’s blessing, to go on in this way for some years, we shall attack our Flanders with fiery darts, and, I hope, take it by storm, that antichrist being put to flight or at least weakened, our Savior may reign there.
  I need not write very fully upon master Hooper’s business; for you will get more certain information from the letter which he tells me he is about to send you.  I will only add thus much, that the other bishops are giving him much trouble.  Master Hooper is indeed elected bishop of Gloucester, and sworn into the office, but not yet consecrated, as they call it.  For the bishops will not depart a nail’s breadth from their prescribed form of consecration, which is manifestly superstitious.  And as they are all of them intent upon subjecting Hooper to their ceremonies, so he opposes them with all his might, and refers every thing to the apostolic ceremonies.  Hence there has arisen a most grievous controversy respecting the use of vestments in the church.  The bishops defend the use of peculiar vestments in the church upon two grounds; first, that they are matters of indifference, and, secondly, that they are prescribed by the king’s majesty, with whom rests the removal or appointment in the church of things indifferent.  Hooper denies, on the other hand, that they are matters of indifference, inasmuch as they obscure the dignity of the priesthood of Christ, and nurture hypocrisy, superstition, &c.  Hooper has written very fully upon this subject to the earl of Warwick, but he replies that the king must be obeyed in matters of indifference; that we must avoid placing a stumbling-block in the way of the weak, as Paul did when he made a vow, and was shorn, and when he circumcised Timothy.  Hooper has written him a reply, but I do not yet perceive with what effect: nay, on the third of this month he wrote another letter on the same subject to the whole council, which they have not yet answered.  We are suspended between hope and fear: the nobility seem inclined to take part with the bishops.  God grant that I may prove a false prophet in this matter!  The bishops are struggling for their own credit, which they prefer to Christ.
  Master à Lasco, a man of such integrity, courtesy, piety and erudition, as cannot easily be expressed or described, sent you, some months since, his opinion respecting your alliance with the Genevese.  He paid a visit to master Bucer last month.  They came to an agreement on every subject except only that of the corporal presence in the supper.  Bucer wrote down the heads of his opinion respecting the Lord’s supper, which he left for master à Lasco to examine: this learned and excellent man is writing some annotations upon them, and most strenuously confutes Bucer’s opinion.  When he has finished them, he will send back to Bucer his heads with the annotations annexed.  I pray that God may see fit to open his mind.  We are exceedingly grieved at that rascal Valentine having so imposed upon us.  He went away without taking leave of us, nor do we know whither he is gone.  May the Lord recall him into the right way!
  The Πρόσκαιρος of Musculus is published in French; to which have been added the opinions of many worthy men upon the same subject; as of Œcolampadius, Zuinglius, the church of Zurich, master à Lasco, Calvin, and others, all of them carefully drawn up here.  If master Froschover will send me the Chronicles of your country, I will faithfully provide for the payment of it, in whatever place me may point out.  I wish he would also have the kindness to send me, at the next fair, if he cannot do so before, one or two copies of all your sermons.  I have hitherto been living with master Hooper, but my present vocation has now separated me from him.  The most illustrious master Utenhovius is about to board with me; for, having been elected one of the elders of the church, he is unable to accompany master Hooper to Gloucester.  We shall however be present with master Hooper by our correspondence with him, as far as may lie in our power.  I return you my sincere thanks for your kind wishes respecting the marriage in my family; and pray the same blessings in return to your daughters married in the Lord.  Farewell, most excellent sir, and, though I am undeserving of such honor, be pleased to enroll me among your friends, and those of your church, which is the church of Christ.  Be pleased also to salute for me my reverend preceptors, masters Bibliander, Pellican, Gesner, and master Sebastian.  I have written in haste by reason of the magnitude of the affairs by which I am now daily overwhelmed.  October 13, 1550.  London.
          Your most devoted and obedient,
              MARTIN MICRONIUS.
  I did not seal this letter, written a week since, because I was not aware at what time master Burcher intended to set off; and I easily conjectured that circumstances might take place in the mean time, of which it would be worth while to inform you.  And so indeed it has turned out.  For we have discovered that the whole of the king’s council are inclined to side with the bishops in this controversy about the vestments, against master Hooper.  In addition to this, the privileges of our German church are in the greatest danger.  By canvassing and persuasion the bishops have procured from the king’s council, that we are not to enjoy the free use of the sacraments, but must be fettered by the English ceremonies, which are intolerable to all godly persons.  This circumstance occasions the greatest distre4ss to our superintendent, John à Lasco, and to all the godly.  I have thought fit to acquaint you with it, that you may be pleased to commend to God the cause of our church.
  Master Hooper has just called upon me as I am writing, on his return from court.  He tells me that yesterday the bishop of London was most violent against him before the council, and that he impugned his doctrine, and loaded him with the greatest insults.  A copy of his letter is refused him, for the bishop demanded this from the council.  But Hooper remains steadfast in his opposition to all the relics of popery.  Farewell.  Oct. 20.  Masters John à Lasco and John Utenhovius commend themselves entirely to your church.
                The same as above.

LETTER CCLXV. MARTIN MICRONIUS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
Aug. 14, 1551.
  Much health.  Though I am distracted by various engagements, and especially in making provision for this infant state of our church, yet I cannot pass over this offered opportunity of writing to you, lest you should think me forgetful of you, whereas you are deeply seated in my regard, both by reason of the most Christian sermons that I have heard you preach, and also of your lately published Decades, from which we derive no ordinary assistance in edifying the church of Christ.  We have need of help in the present difficulty of our affairs.  We, who are desirous to hand down to the churches the sincere doctrine of God, are attacked on every side.  We have not only to contend with the papists, who are almost every where ashamed of their errors, but much more with the secretaries and Epicureans and pseudo-evangelicals.  In addition to the ancient errors respecting pædobaptism, the incarnation of Christ, the authority of the magistrate, the [lawfulness of an] oath, the property and community of goods, and the like, new ones are rising up every day, with which we have to contend.  The chief opponents, however, of Christ’s divinity are the Arians, who are now beginning to shake our churches with greater violence than ever, as they deny the conception of Christ by the Virgin.  Their principal arguments may be reduced under three heads:  The first is respecting the unity of God, as declared throughout all the scriptures both of the old and new Testament; and that the doctrine, as well as the name, of the Trinity is a novel invention, as not being mentioned in any part of scripture.  Their next argument is this:  the scripture, they say, which every where acknowledges one God, admits and professes that this one God is the Father alone, (Joh. xvii. 3,) who is also called one God by Paul, (1 Cor. viii. 6.)  Lastly, they so pervert the passages which seem to establish the divinity of Christ, as to say that none of them refer intrinsically to Christ himself, but that he has received all from another, namely, from the Father; (Joh. v. Matt. xxviii.): and they say that God cannot receive from God; and that Christ was only in this respect superior to any of mankind, that he received more gifts from God the Father.
  I have replied to these things as God has enabled me, and (thank the Lord!) master à Lasco, who is, next to God, the principal defender of our church, affords me his assistance.  I was desirous, however, to lay these things before your reverence, that, should you have leisure, you may be pleased to write me word what may most fitly be replied to these three arguments of the enemies of Christ; for from your decade, wherein you most solidly establish his divinity upon other grounds, I have been able to elicit little or nothing which may be satisfactorily brought against them.  You, who are our fathers, teachers, and guides in the reformation of the churches, will not grudge affording us your advice and instruction, that we may rightly direct the church of God, and fortify it against all heresies.  We are using every exertion to that effect; and especially, we have established in our church a collation of scripture in the German langauge, in which are discussed the sermons of the preceding week, to preserve the purity of doctrine; and this arrangement, in some measure, represses the heretical, and confirms the ignorant in the Christian doctrine.  We have, besides, in our German church, two other lectures in Latin; one by master à Lasco, the other by master Walter Delvin; after which there takes place a comparison of scriptures on the subject of the lectures last delivered, to the great advantage of the churches.  Thus we have three collations of scripture every week, whereas at first we had only determined to have two.  One thing in particular is still wanting in our church, namely, the administration of baptism and of the Lord’s supper.  Liberty is granted us by the royal license, but we are prevented by the malevolence of certain individuals from the enjoyment of so great a benefit.  Master à Lasco is indeed diligently exerting himself with the bishops, as his duty requires him to do, that we may be permitted to enjoy the liberty that has been conceded to us; but all his exhortations are without any effect.  I fear we shall have to wait till the meeting of parliament, and I know not when that will take place.
  The sweating sickness made sad havoc in London in July, and master à Lasco, who was seized with it, was in so much danger, that we altogether despaired of his life.  But he has now recovered, for the Lord had compassion upon us; for had he been taken away, the churches of the foreigners, there is reason to fear, would have perished with him.  The Lord is the only defender of his church!  In what state are the affairs of master Hooper, the bishop of Gloucester, you will best learn from his own letter.  As far as I can understand, he is faithfully employing his talent.  I pray you to exert your influence in recommending to him meekness and gentleness.  Exhort mistress Anna, his wife, not to entangle herself with the cares of this life.  Let her beware of the thorns, by which the word of God is choked.  It is a most dangerous thing for one who is in the service of Christ to hunt after riches and honors.  Your admonitions will have much weight with them both.  The bishop of Lincoln, a favorer of evangelical doctrine, departed this life not long since.  The sweating sickness has carried off two most noble youths, the duke of Suffolk and his  brother Charles.  The kingdom, thank God, is this summer in a state of tranquility; for the rising of some of the peasantry, at the beginning of the summer, was very speedily put an end to by the authority and activity of the magistrates.
  Farewell, my master, and take my freedom in good part.  Be pleased, I pray you, to salute in my name my reverend preceptors, masters Bibliander, Pellican, Gesner, and Frisius.  May the Lord deliver your church from all evil!  Aman.  1551.  Aug. 14.  Master à Lasco is in the country with the archbishop of Canterbury: he would otherwise have written to you, as far as I could gather from what he said before he went.
            Yours wholly,
              MARTIN MICRONIUS.

LETTER CCLXVI. MARTIN MICRONIUS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
Nov. 7, 1551.
  Much health.  I do not think there is at this time any occasion for me to write at length concerning the state of this kingdom, and the condition of both the English and foreign churches; for you will learn every thing from these worthy young men, and from the letters of others, far more accurately than it would be safe and easy for me now to communicate.  The disturbance which suddenly took place here on the second imprisonment of the duke of Somerset, his wife, and other noble persons, greatly distressed our minds; and the rather, because various and uncertain reasons were commonly assigned for his arrest.  But the Lord will doubtless order every thing for the welfare of his church.  Master Hooper is most vigilant in his ministry.  I grieve that so little help is afforded him by others.  Wherefore he must especially be aided and encouraged by your letters: and let him be exhorted to unite prudence and Christian lenity to the severity of discipline.
  The affairs of the strangers’ church are, thank God, in a flourishing condition: they daily make great progress in doctrine, consolation, exhortation, public comparing of the scriptures both in Latin and German; and also in the diligent exercise of ecclesiastical discipline.  We feel indeed that we are sometimes assailed by Satan through those enemies of Christ, the hypocritical and heretical bishops; but the Lord protects us, to whom it belongs to guild up the church, and to defend and preserve it when so built up.  Master à Lasco, our superintendent, a man (to speak it in one word) almost divine, is not only of the greatest use to the foreigners’ churches, but also to the English, by teaching, exhorting, counseling, and writing.  I could wish this man to be especially noticed with commendation by all the learned men who are dedicating any work to the king or his council; by which means some accession might be made to his influence (which is great in the country,) to the advantage of his churches in this realm.  He will shortly publish a most learned work, in my opinion, upon the sacramentarian controversy, of which he has given me a certain portion to read.  On the 17th of last month a certain godly brother, and sincere in the Christian religion, was burnt at Antwerp on account of the dispute about the sacraments, and yielded his holy soul to Christ the Lord.  London, Nov. 7, 1551.
  Deign to salute in my name my worthy preceptors, masters Bibliander, Pellican and Gesner.  Utenhovius would have written to you, had he not been prevented by ill health; for which reason he begs me to make his excuse, and promises to atone for this long silence by a most copious letter at another time.
          Yours wholly,
            MARTIN MICRONIUS.

LETTER CCLXVII. MARTIN MICRONIUS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
March 9, 1552.
  Much health.  Master John à Lasco, our superintendent, would have written to you, my most honored master, respecting every thing that is going on here, had he not been prevented by the mass of business in which he is involved.  He has desired me therefore to write to you, in his name, a full statement of every event; which duty I have promised, as it became me, diligently to perform.  You have doubtless heard of the imprisonment of the duke of Somerset, his wife, and many others of the nobility.  Various grounds have been assigned for this procedure.  The real cause, however, as I understand from persons worthy of credit, was his having formed a conspiracy against some of the council, which is a capital offence.  For the king’s council, after the first imprisonment of the duke of Somerset, with the view of uniting them more closely to each other, passed a law to this effect, that any one of the king’s council, who should plot in secret against another of that body, should suffer death by hanging, as a felon.  And as Somerset was said to have offended against this law, he was arrested on the 16th of October, and on the following day his wife, together with many other of the nobility who were thought to have been privy to this conspiracy.  The trial of the duke of Somerset took place in Westminster hall on the first of December, and lasted from an early hour in the morning till the evening.  He could not be charged with any treason against the king, and is said to have defended himself against all the charges with boldness and discretion.  But as he was unable to clear himself of the charge of conspiracy against some of the council, he was condemned to be hanged, according to a law which he himself had framed.  He was, however, beheaded on the 22nd of January, to the great grief of the people.  Afterwards, on the 26th of February, two knights were hanged, and two others beheaded for the same offence.  I am afraid of a similar end to the wife of Somerset, who is said to bear a principal part in all this mischief.  We must pray God, that all things may turn out to his glory, and that in the midst of these disorders he will preserve his church.
  We have great hopes of a reformation both in church and state during this parliament.  For there are appointed to the reformation of the church eight godly bishops, among whom is Hooper; eight doctors in divinity, among whom is master John à Lasco, a man fearless in the cause of godliness, and master Peter Martyr.  The business has turned out well enough hitherto; and if the bishops of London and Ely would not stand in the way with their worldly policy, 9t would, I think, have made yet farther progress.  But I hope that their opposition will be ineffectual.  For the king is most anxious for purity, and is urgent for a serious reformation; and those who possess the greatest influence in the council are seeking the same.  The authority of master Hooper in the council is daily increasing, whence the greatest benefit, I hope, will accrue to the church.  Our foreign churches, thank the Lord, are in a most flourishing condition, through the exertions of our superintendent, master à Lasco.  We must pray the Lord to perfect what he has begun; and that he will be pleased to defend all his churches, which Satan does not cease to attack with his marvelous devices.  But it is well that he is conquered and bound by Christ the Lord, whom I pray to deliver you from the midst of the tumults of war, and that you may receive no evil yourselves from the evil that surrounds you.  Farewell, my master, and may God continue to enlighten you with his Spirit!  Amen.  Be pleased to salute in my name all my honored preceptors, masters Pellican, Bibliander, and Gesner.  London, March 9, 1552.
            Yours,
              MARTIN MICRONIUS.

LETTER CCLXVIII. MARTIN MICRONIUS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
Feb. 18, 1553.
  Much health.  I know how greatly your piety is delighted by the letters of your friends, in which is set forth the state of the churches: and not without reason, since all the churches, dispersed throughout the world, are only one family of God; and we see that the apostle Paul willingly learned from others, and most diligently declared to others in his turn, the condition of the churches.  This consideration has compelled me to write to you, though I am more than enough occupied upon other matters; that you may know that the church of England, and our foreign churches here in London, viz. the German and French, are, by the great blessing of God, in a flourishing condition.  Our foreign churches are frequently attacked by the pseudo-bishops, and with wonderful arts and stratagems: but Christ has conquered hitherto, and has turned every thing to the advancement of the church; so that no foreigner is now eligible to the rights of an English citizen, without having previously made a confession of his faith to the ministers of the foreign churches.  Should this regulation last some years, this kingdom will be delivered from great and various errors, which are usually introduced by foreign sectaries.  Parliament is to meet on the first of March: God grant that it may bring forth some advantage to the church!  Certainly I cannot as yet auger any mischief.  The Latin lectures in our churches have been suspended since the decease of the wife of master à Lasco, nor will he be able to resume them before Easter, by reason of his various engagements, or rather those of the church; though both he himself and his new wife, whom he married on the 29th of January, are in tolerable health.  I hope, however, that this interruption of his lectures will be counterbalanced by some great benefit to the church.  We are expecting master Hooper in London within these three days: he is to preach, as I hear, before the king’s majesty on the 26th of this month.  I never could have expected him to be so faithful and diligent in his bishoprick; for when dainty meat is put into the mouths of others, it is apt to make them dumb and inactive.  The wife of Peter martyr departed this life four days since.  master John Utenhovius, who was so ill two months since that his life was despaired of, is now, thank God, convalescent.
  I wish you would publish the heads you have collected for your discourses on Isaiah, the books of Samuel and Kings, the Acts of the Apostles, the Epistle to the Romans, and whatever else you may have by you.  Far greater assistance, in my opinion, can hence be derived towards a solid knowledge of scripture, than from the bulky commentaries of numerous writers.  If I dared recommend this to you, I would endeavor to persuade you: but as I am not in your counsels, and as I doubt not but that you are anxious for nothing but the edification of the church, I dare not advise any thing rashly, but only state my opinion; and I should not even do this, were it not that I hoped to derive some benefit from it.
  As to public matters, we are in the enjoyment of peace in this country: God grant that we may employ it to the promotion of godliness!   The emperor Charles went to Brussels on the sixth of this month in ill health.  He is oppressing the mass-priests of our nation with severe exactions, so that they are beginning in some measure to fear for their kingdom.  May God turn everything to the advancement of his kingdom!  Amen.  Be pleased to salute my honored preceptors, masters Pellican, Bibliander, and Gesner.  Masters John à Lasco and John Utenhovius desired me to salute them, and especially yourself.  London, Feb. 18, 1553.
            Yours wholly,
              MARTIN MICRONIUS.

LETTER CCLXIX. JOHN UTENHOVIUS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
July 7, 1549.
  Greeting.  When immediately on my return to Strasburgh with John à Lasco, whom I mentioned before, I observed a letter, I readily perceived it to be the same as that which you gave me to read when I was with you.  In the interval, too, of my absence from this place, I received from master Calvin that treatise of his on the Eucharist, or Lord’s supper, which he sent me of his own accord.  There will not therefore be any occasion for you to send me another copy.  You would, however, greatly oblige me, if you would send me whatever you have of Bucer’s on the Lord’s supper, written by him before he began to dote.  I will repay this favor, whenever your circumstances may require it, by any means in my power.  Master Butler promised me that he would endeavor to obtain from Musculus, Vadianus, and some others, their opinion upon the subject I proposed to you, and which you doubtless well remember.  Should he seem to require your assistance in this matter, I pray you not to decline it: and I wish we could obtain the united assent of the Bernese church.  Should any thing be obtaianed, so that they write to me from thence, the letter may be forwarded to Frankfort, to one Adrian Eding, who is well known to master Butler, and also to Froschover.
  As to any news, we have nothing here but what is of a distressing character.  All these churches seem to become weaker and weaker every day, and to be altogether going to ruin.  For a general inactivity pervades the minds of those, whose duty it was to have acted in a more manly way.  Our adversaries, meanwhile, to whom all religion and godliness is a matter of the greatest ridicule, are laughing at us, as they say, with swollen cheeks.  Those who were older and more zealous in the faith, and in the proper administration of affairs, and who deserved well of religion, and so were prophets themselves, have either been called out of this life, or are dispersed every where out of Germany into other parts.  Add to this, that we are daily hearing the most execrable blasphemies against God and his word from those, who formerly acknowledged Christ, but have now gone over from us to our adversaries.  Lastly, we see the people so far from being acted upon by any feelings of repentance, that they are become more listless and perverse than usual; whence it is evident, that nothing less than the severest punishment is awaiting us for our ingratitude.  May God meanwhile, have compassion on us, for the sake of our Lord Jesus Christ, and increase our faith by his Spirit, that we may stand firm in the confession of his name, even in the midst of every evil.
  You will learn other matters from the letters of the rest of us.  I had purposed indeed to have gone over to England from Cologne; but by reason of the great dangers which await me in Flanders, in compliance with the advice of my friends, I am meditating a journey through France, which, God willing, I shall commence to-morrow.  In the mean time, I earnestly commend myself to your prayers.  Farewell, most accomplished sir, and honored master, and inscribe me in the list of your friends.  May God strengthen you by his Spirit, that with a firm and unbroken courage you may defend, even to the latest day of your life, the high post you have gained, to the glory of his name.  Again farewell, and do not fail to let me know by the next Frankfort fair, whatever you may think it expedient for me to be acquainted with.  Strasburgh, July 7, 1549.
          Yours, as he is his own,
              J. UTENHOVIUS.

LETTER CCLXX. JOHN UTENHOVIUS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
April 9, 1551.
  Greeting.  Not a single syllable have I received from you in reply to my last letter.  I should, notwithstanding, have written to you before now, if I could have given you any certain information about master Hooper’s affairs, respecting which I felt assured that you were very anxious: but as I was unable to do so, I thought it best to delay my letter until this unhappy dispute of his with the bishops should have been settled.  As this is now the case, I could not refrain from a brief relation of the affair.  You are aware, if I am not mistaken, that master Hooper accepted the bishopricl of Gloucester, voluntarily offered him by the king’s majesty about nine months since, with the condition that he should, under no circumstances, be compelled to adopt any superstitious observances, and especially at his inauguration, which they call consecration; and this was readily conceded to him by the king and the royal council.  The bishops, however, carried the matter so far, I know not under what pretext, before the council, (being, doubtless, far more solicitous for their own glory than that of the Lord Christ,) that they retracted the liberty they had once allowed him according to the word of God; so that, as far at least as related to the vestments and the carrying the pastoral staff, Hooper was urged to comply with the popish form of inauguration.  He resisted the bishops, however, long and manfully, employing many very powerful arguments, asserting that a Christian man who was convinced of the ungodliness of the use of such vestments in the ministry of the church, could not use them in the ministry with a safe conscience, both because they bring along with them an opinion of merit, hypocrisy, a thousand kinds of superstitions and stumbling-blocks, and also because they too truly place in the back ground the priesthood of Christ the Lord.  But among those of greater learning, master à Lasco alone advocated this notion, and he did not shrink from subscribing alone to what Hooper wrote.  When Bucer, of pious memory, and Peter Martyr were asked their opinion upon this subject, they replied, that it was certainly their wish that vestments of this kind should be altogether removed from the church; but yet that they could not perceive, (inasmuch as to the clean all things are clean,) why godly persons who were otherwise convinced of the impiety of the use of vestments in the ministry of the church, were yet forbidden to use them.  However, after a long struggle, Hooper was committed to prison, and about a fortnight after, overcome by the obstinacy of the bishops, the good man submitted himself and his cause to the judgment of the privy council: the result of which was, that he was inaugurated in the usual manner, about the middle of Lent, yet not without the greatest regret both of myself and of all good men, nor without affording a most grievous stumbling-block to many of our brethren; a circumstance that I am unwilling to conceal from you, though, from my affection for Hooper, I am very unwilling to make the communication: and indeed I should not now do it, were I not aware of your sincere regard for Hooper, and that you look upon him as another self.  I would gladly add more upon this subject, were it safe to entrust every thing to writing: but I would rather inform you by word of mouth than by a private letter.  Meanwhile, take care not to say a word about me to master Hooper; neither will it be worth while to give him any advice about this business, since what is already done can admit of no remedy.  If, however, in your discretion, you should think proper to write and advise him, you are at liberty to do so, and it is chiefly for this reason that I have made you acquainted with the circumstances of the case; but you will do this with greater effect, if, without mentioning my name or that of any other person, you write him word that you have gained your information from a friend.  I hope, however, that this event will be of use to Hooper himself, and also to the church.  He went to his bishoprick a fortnight before Easter, where, as far as we can understand, he is most diligent in the performance of his ministerial duties; on which account thanks be to the Lord God, to whom I heartily commend both his ministry and your own.  If I can possibly obtain leave of absence from our church, I shall visit Hooper for some months; and if I can anywise be useful to him in his ministry, I shall not decline such assistance as the Lord may enable me to afford; and this I promised him when he went away.
  Our church, moreover, is going on very favorably, excepting only that the bishops will not yet allow us the pure administration of the sacraments.  The word however, is proclaimed in all its purity, with the greatest benefit to the church, by our friend Martin Micronius, who preaches in a popular manner, like the clergy at Zurich, and is at the same time a cautious interpreter of the word, introducing nothing that is forced or trifling, and which does not tend to entire edification.  A system of discipline is now established by us, as far as we have it in our power; as a part of which is to be considered the catechism which we are now preparing, and also prophesying, or a collation of the scriptures, which we shall begin next week together with the English.  We shall also undertake it in Latin every Monday, after the lecture of master à Lasco, (who is now expounding the gospel of St. John, to the great admiration and advantage of his hearers,) and also in German every Wednesday, and that after the lecture of master Gualter, who will expound Genesis in Latin.  We shall therefore have two collations every week, in the former of which both the preceding lectures will be modestly sifted, and in the latter the sermons preached during the whole week: which employment cannot be without the greatest advantage, if the Lord, to whom it belongs to give the increase of all good things, will afford his blessing.  The wife of master Hooper, who is still in London, has requested me to send you, together with my own, the letter I have enclosed with it.
  Salute for me, I pray, your dear and amiable wife, and masters Bibliander, Pellican, Gualter, Zuingle, Wolf, Frisius, and Sebastian.  And you must not forget master Gesner, and above all my host master Butler, to whom, together with his wife, and to your whole church, I wish every happiness in the Lord.  Farewell, most honored sir and master, in him who in our life.  Amen.  London, Apr. 9, 1551.
          Yours, truly and heartily,
              JOHN UTENHOVIUS.
  Master Martin dutifully salutes you.  He is now so entirely engaged as the sole minister of the German congregation, that he is unable to write to you at present.  But he will make amends at some future opportunity.

LETTER CCLXXI. JOHN UTENHOVIUS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
Aug. 14, 1551.
  Greeting. About four months since, I gave a letter to a certain brother, which he undertook to deliver to you.  But after some time, I know not under what pretence, he sent it back to me.  I have, however, kept it by me till now, in the hope of having some opportunity of sending it, though it is so out of date, that you might at least receive this testimony of my regard for you, and not altogether consider me to have been unmindful of you during so long a silence.  But I now send you the letter itself, that you may know the result of master Hooper’s affair.  I was long in doubt whether I ought to write these things respecting an individual with whom I am upon such friendly terms.  But when I considered that the failings both of the prophets and the apostles are not without reason recorded in scripture as a perpetual warning to mankind, I forthwith shook off all hesitation, in the full assurance that, with your wonted kindness and discretion, you would bear with the infirmity of our brother as a Christian should do, and that, if you deem it worth while, you would use the occasion to admonish him of his duty.  Meanwhile I have no doubt but that this affair will eventually turn out to the good of the church.  For it is by means of this kind that we are wont to become better acquainted with ourselves, and to humble our souls more before God, and also to become more favorably disposed to, and less prejudiced against, the ministery of our neighbors.  And, indeed, master Hooper is now laboring with such faithfulness and diligence in the discharge of his office, as deservedly to cheer the hearts of all godly persons.  The rest you will easily learn from the bearer of this letter; for, as I think, he has a more intimate acquaintance with the whole of the circumstances of Hooper than I have, inasmuch as he was himself at Gloucester, and also resided some time at Oxford, which is at no great distance.  As you will learn from him the state of this church and kingdom, I will now conclude my letter, nothing doubting but that our friend Martin will also make you acquainted with all our affairs.
  When I returned from hence to Strasburgh, two years ago, John Burcher gave me to taste a piece of spiced cake, which he said had been sent to him by some friend from Zurich.  I should much like some of the same kind to be forwarded to me at the next Easter fair at Frankfort; and I request you to purchase one for me which is not too highly seasoned, and forward it to the house of Adrian Eding, at Frankfort, with a statement of the price, which I will take care shall be paid, either here to Stumphius, or to any one at Frankfort whom you may prefer.  You will thereby do me a very great favor, and if I can be of any use to you in my turn, or oblige you in any way here, you will always find me entirely at your service.  Salute for me, I pray you, all the brethren whom I have mentioned in the other letter, and farewell, my ever honored master, in the Lord, to whom I heartily commend your ministry, and all your household.  London, August 14, 1551.
            Yours as his own,
              JO.  UTENHOVIUS.

LETTER CCLXXII. JOHN UTENHOVIUS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
unknown
March 9, 1552.
  Greeting.  Your letter of the eighth of November was given to me some time since by master Hooper.  I should now write to you at some length touching the state of both our public and private affairs, were they not all of them as well known, or perhaps more so, to the individual who has taken upon himself the charge of the letter, as they are to myself.  For this reason you will have at this time a shorter letter from me than you would otherwise have received.  This, however, I must tell you, that all godly persons in this country entertain good hopes of the advancement of religion; for the restoration of which those persons who are appointed by the king’s majesty for that purpose are laboring with the greatest activity.  Among these is Thomas, archbishop of Canterbury, John Hooper, John à Lasco, Peter Martyr, and many other learned and godly men.  And although the whole of them (in number thirty-two) may sometimes be unable to agree upon every point, yet I hope that those will prevail who are more sound in doctrine, inasmuch as the king, who has altogether at heart the furtherance of pure religion, will interpose his authority whenever it may be required.  Nor is there any doubt but that, with the blessing of Christ our Lord, if any sound and wholesome agreement can be effected among the above-named persons, as we all of us hope will be the case, their acts will subsequently be confirmed without any difficulty by the votes of parliament.  Meanwhile, it is our duty, and that too of yourselves yonder, earnestly and importunately to entreat God to be present by his Spirit at the convocation which is now assembled, so that every thing which may be debated therein, and especially the things appertaining to religion, may turn out to the glory of his name, and the advancement of the kingdom of his Son: which that he may do, I most earnestly and heartily implore.
  I shall say nothing of the expedition which the king of France is now preparing for the liberation of Germany, as it is rumored here; for I think that you possess fuller and more certain information upon the subject.  Master à Lasco, as you may easily believe, is so much occupied by the reformation now going on, that he has desired me to make his excuses to you for not writing at this time.  Salute for me, I pray you, masters Bibliander, Pellican, Gualter, Wolf, and the other brethren, not forgetting master Gesner.  Salute for me likewise master Butler and his wife.  Master à Lasco salutes you, and master Gualter.  Farewell in the Lord, most accomplished sir, to whom I heartily commend you and your ministry.  London, March 9, 1552.
            Yours as his own,
              JO. UTENHOVIUS.

LETTER CCLXXIII. JOHN UTENHOVIUS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
Oct. 12. 1552.
  Greeting. Though I am now involved in various and important engagements, I cannot forbear writing to you somewhat, by which I may in some measure at least express the inclination of my heart towards you.  Besides, I cannot but make you acquainted with the happy progress of our church here, on which account we must offer everlasting thanks to our good and gracious God.  It has indeed so turned out in accordance with my wishes, that I can scarcely desire to see it in a better state.  Our friend Martin most effectively performs his office, and discharges all his duties with fidelity, prudence, and diligence.  Four months since I accompanied master Hooper, the bishop of Worcester, from hence to Worcester, and staid with him nearly seven weeks.  I cannot speak in sufficient terms of commendation of his faithfulness and zeal.  May the Lord God render his ministry fruitful, that the result may correspond with the desires and exertions of the man!
  Some disputes have arisen within these few days among the bishops, in consequence of a sermon of a pious preacher, chaplain to the duke of Northumberland, preached by him before the king and council, in which he inveighed with great freedom against kneeling at the Lord’s supper, which is still retained here by the English.  This good man, however, a Scotsman by nation, has so wrought upon the minds of many persons, that we may hope some good to the church will at length arise from it; which I earnestly implore the Lord to grant.
  Master à Lasco has just received letters from some Polish and Lithuanian noblemen, and has also received one full of all kindness from the king of Poland himself.  The purport of them all is to invite him to go into Poland at the public general assembly of that kingdom, which is appointed by the king for the reformation of religion.  But, to avoid all ground of his being suspected by the adversaries of the faith, they especially require that he may be sent thither upon some pretence or other as an ambassador from our king.  This proposal was made to-day for the first time to the duke of Northumberland by the archbishop of Canterbury.  May the Lord grant that it may turn out to the glory of his name!  Master à Lasco, and master Martin, who are now occupied in different ways, desire you to excuse their not writing.  Meanwhile they salute you most affectionately.  Salute for me, I pray you, master Bibliander, and the other fathers and brethren with whom I am acquainted in those parts, and especially master Butler.  Farewell, my master Bullinger, most dear and esteemed by me in the Lord, to whom I commend your ministry from my heart.  London, Oct. 12, 1552.  From the house of master à Lasco, with whom I am lodging.
        Yours truly from my heart,
            JO. UTENHOVIUS.

LETTER CCLXXIV. JOHN UTENHOVIUS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
London
June 7, 1553.
  Greeting.  Your letter, my excellent friend, of the 9th of March, was first delivered to me by Richard Hilles four days since, in which you inform me of your having recovered from that very severe illness under which you were suffering in December: whereupon I greatly rejoice, and I pray the Lord to establish your health, and long to preserve you in safety to his church, to the glory of his name.  I was also suffering in the same month from very dangerous illness, insomuch that all the brethren, and also my host, master à Lasco, entirely despaired of my life: but through the mercy of God I am tolerably restored to my former health.  The Lord grant that I may employ it, according to my weak abilities, to the advancement of his kingdom!  Farther, I am not surprised at your complaining to me, as you do, of the neglect of master Hooper, but I am more surprised at the fact itself.  I will however shortly remind him by letter, and that seriously; but what I shall obtain by it I do not know: for he is himself so minded, that he never writes to any one of us, not even to master à Lasco, though he is certainly much attached to us; so that those complaints of yours are such as are common to us all.  Meanwhile I would have you to be assured that Bullinger will ever be very dear to him, and esteemed by him beyond all others, as I can testify of my own knowledge.  As to the money which Hooper lent to the students whom you mention, I will ascertain from Hooper himself how he wishes it to be disposed of; and if I receive any answer from him, I will let you know.
  Master à Lasco, who is still here, salutes you: he promised me yesterday that he would write to you; wherefore, as I doubt not but that he will perform his promise, I shall not now write any more about him.  We have no news, except that the king, who has lately been in the most imminent danger from a most severe cough, which had already attacked his inside even to the very vitals, is now somewhat better, though it is hardly possible that his health will be entirely restored during the whole of this summer.  Meanwhile, however, he has always been most favorably disposed towards religion, and is so at this time more than ever.  May God preserve him to his church; and I entreat you yonder to commend him to God in your prayers.  Articles are now printed in the king’s name, to which all persons must subscribe who are to be appointed to any office in the church, as also those who are already appointed, under pain of deprivation.
  Once more, I again repeat in the Lord the request that I made to you two years since, namely, that if it is not too much trouble, you will procure to be sent to me from thence, either by yourself or some other person, to the Frankfort fair, a large cake, not seasoned with much spice, such as you sent to Burcher four years ago.  It might easily be arranged for me to receive it by the hands of Richard Hilles after the Frankfort fair, by which means you would confer upon me a greater obligation than I am able to express.  You can tell me what it costs, and I will pay the amount to Hooper towards the liquidation of the debt above mentioned, or in any other way you may prefer.  If I can do you any service by way of return, I beg you to make use of me as a friend.  Master Martin Micronius desires his best salutations.  Salute for me, I pray you, masters Bibliander, Pellican, Gesner, and master Butler, to whom I wish better health in the Lord.  Farewell, my excellent friend, and ever esteemed by me in Christ, to whom I heartily commend you and your ministry; and do you love me as you are wont to do.  London, June 7, 1553.
          Yours as his own,
            JO. UTENHOVIUS.

LETTER CCLXXV. JOHN UTENHOVIUS TO HENRY BULLINGER
Basle
March 1, 1554.
  Greeting.  As soon as I arrived at Basle, most honored sir, and much esteemed master in Christ, my first care was to look out for a comfortable lodging.  I first called upon master Oporinus, to whom I gave your letter, having read which, he made diligent inquiry as to the state of your affairs.  I replied that every thing was going on favorably.  On our first interview he offered me board and lodging, for which he demanded forty crowns.  I thanked him for so prompt a manifestation of his kindness towards me, but thought it best not to do any thing in a hurry, since a matter of this kind brings with it much inconvenience, if it turn out unfortunately, and on the other hand much comfort, if it turn out well and happily: wherefore I thought it may duty first to call upon Cœlius, because my father desired me to board with him, whenever I should visit Basle.  He promised to use all his endeavors and exertions in my behalf; but said that he could not receive me into his own family for various reasons, of which the principal was, the meanness of their fare and the extreme high price of provisions.  At length, by the intervention of some friends, a man of good character and tolerable learning has received me into his family, with whom I am staying until a suitable lodging shall have been provided for me.  However that may turn out, I perceive that I shall be much more uncomfortably situated, as far as diet is concerned, than I was, honored sir, in your family; but, as you well know, I am content with very little.  You have now the state of my affairs: by the blessing of God I am in good health, and all things succeed according to my wish.
  When I diligently reflect, most honored sir, upon the great favors I have received from you, I do not seem to myself that I can ever repay them; but I am relieved by that peculiar and almost divine kindness of yours, by whom a grateful mind, and one that is anxious by every means to show its gratitude, is regarded as equivalent to a rich present: this I pray you, sir, to accept, and be assured that I am most devoted to you.  Farewell, most excellent sir, in Christ Jesus.  If it be not too much trouble, respectfully salute your wife in my name, with your daughters Alethea and Dorothy, and most worthy sons-in-law masters Lavater and Simler.  Again and again, most honored master, farewell in Christ.  In haste, March 1, 1554.  Basle.
          Your most devoted,
            JOHN UTENHOVIUS.

LETTER CCLXXVI. JOHN UTENHOVIUS TO H. BULLINGER AND P. MARTYR.
Wladislaw
June 23, 1557.
  Greeting.  That you may have, most excellent sirs, some information respecting our affairs in these parts, you must know that on the 23rd of February last we set off from Cracow to Wilna, (the metropolis of great Lithuania,) to the king, and arrived there, by God’s blessing, on the 17th of March.  We waited upon the king two days after, who, to the surprise of many persons present, received the noble John à Lasco with the greatest kindness.  He held out his right hand to each of us; and while à Lasco, as is the custom, wished every happiness both to himself and his kingdom, and congratulated him on the light of evangelical doctrine which had shone forth, under his government, upon the whole kingdom, and openly declared the reason of his return to his own country, and the object he had in view, the king listened to him with kindness and attention, and presently replied from his own moth, that his return was very gratifying to him.  But the vice-chancellor, a churchman forsooth, and laden with innumerable preferments, the coadjutor of the archbishop of Gresna, and the anxious expectant, moreover, of the first vacant bishoprick, that he might satisfy his duty and respect to the pope, replied afterwards on the 22nd, in the king’s name, and in his presence, saying among other things, that his majesty acknowledged no other light of the gospel, than that which had been acknowledged by his ancestors, and which Poland had now recognized for near six hundred years; and that this was the true doctrine, and that his majesty, after the example of his forefathers, desired to persevere in it.  He added, that it was the prerogative of the king alone to invite any persons to reform the churches here, and that consequently he (à Lasco) could not be invited by the nobles of Poland.  The king had, before this, made known to master `a Lasco by means of the lord palatine of Wilna, that the vice-chancellor was very urgent upon the subject, and was preparing a reply to his address; in the course of which reply, he said, there would be two things (meaning those I have just mentioned) at which he might justly take offence, and he recommended him to reply as briefly as possible, lest he (the vice-chancellor) should again begin a new tissue of rejoinder in the name of his majesty himself; for that no advantage could arise to religion from these mutual disputes.  He added, moreover, that if master à Lasco wished for any thing himself, he should mention it in private, apart from any witnesses; for that he would grant him a private audience, in which he might freely enter upon any subject whatever.  As soon, then, as the vice-chancellor had finished his speech, master à Lasco replied very briefly, (that he might in this respect comply with the king’s request, and relying moreover upon the promise of a private conference with him,) that indeed he had not without reason congratulated the king and his kingdom upon this light of evangelical doctrine.  Meanwhile, said he, let his majesty see that he approve himself and his faith to God the Father and to the Lord Christ, before whose judgment-seat he must one day stand, and render an account of his royal administration: that nevertheless he himself would not cease to hope, as he had always hoped hitherto, respecting his majesty, that God would some time or other give him grace seriously to embrace his pure religion, and to bear testimony to it by a public profession; and that this might be the case, he had hitherto implored the great and good God with the most ardent entreaties and prayers, and would continue to do so.  He added too, that with respect to its being the prerogative of the king alone to issue invitations to any individuals for the purpose of effecting a reformation in the churches of this country, he, for his part, had always sincerely acknowledged, and still continued to acknowledge with reverence, the royal authority, especially if a general reformation of the whole kingdom were about to be attempted: but that this did not prevent his kinsmen and connections, and any others of the nobility (by reason of their peculiar privileges in this country) from inviting either himself or any one else to assist them, within their respective territories, in the advancement of religion; which was the sole object of those who had invited him, and his own also in complying with this holy summons, whatever their enemies might calumniously assert to the contrary.
  Two days after, the king, according to his promise, admitted master à Lasco to a private audience, at which there were many persons present, but not within hearing.  In this he rebuked the kind for his sin in denying the Lord Christ, as he had done two days before, and also for some other serious offences; placing in his hands a certain excellent treatise (which he had composed at Wilna a short time since) concerning the obligation of a king to destroy idolatry and to promote true religion, and also concerning the subtleties of the popish bishops, and the dangers that await the king and the kingdom itself through their means, unless timely precautions be adopted, and concerning the necessary preparations to be made before the meeting of the diet.  The king bore the reproof with composure, but said that he could not at present act otherwise, especially when he was so greatly beset by his adversaries; but that when this Livonian war should be ended, which is now being carried on with very great activity, he would set himself to a serious reformation of the churches, as at the last diet of the kingdom he promised all the orders of the nobility that he would do.  And he acknowledged master à Lasco not only as his subject, but as in his service, namely, as secretary, and in the office that he formerly held under his majesty’s father, Sigismund, of happy memory.  He promised also to protect him against all his calumnious adversaries, and gave him permission, not only to hold meetings of the nobility and ministers at his house, but also to assemble with his brethren in the houses of others as often as he chose, provided only that they met together for the advancement of religion, and not with a view of raising any disturbance.  The king likewise afforded to master `a Lasco many other tokens of his good-will, which I have not now room to mention; and at length, having given his hand to each of us, he went away.
  The palatine, too, of Wilna, a most gracious prince, and endued with various gifts of nature and of the Spirit, and who last year set forth in a public document a most lucid confession of his faith, most courteously entertained us at his own house for a whole month, and assigned an honorable yearly pension to master à Lasco, promising to his daughter, whom he has never seen, but who he requested might be placed in his own family, a thousand Polish florins for her marriage portion, and also a husband from among his own connections; besides which, he honored master à Lasco with numerous presents, and myself also with some.  Now, forasmuch as this prince is greatly attached to you yonder, you will, I think, do very right to dedicate to him some book, by way of interesting his mind in the cause of religion.  For you are aware that great men, especially of this kind, who are entangled in such various engagements, require some spurs and excitements to make them run with greater alacrity in the path proposed.  He is acquainted with Latin, and his authority in Lithuania is so far superior to that of any other person, that “whosoever,” they say, “has seen him, has seen every thing in Lithuania.”  Nor is there any one who possesses greater influence with the king himself.   It would therefore be of great importance to confirm so influential a personage more and more to the church of Christ the Lord.
  Moreover, master à Lasco has occasionally preached at Wilna, to their great edification, in the presence of many of the king’s household, and with the knowledge and permission of his majesty himself.  On our return, too, from Lithuania, as often as opportunity offered, he preached with the view of confirming the brethren both as to other points of faith, and also in the doctrine of the sacrament.  But in the mean time, while we were at Wilna, there came thither seven monks of the order of St. Basil, from Moscow, which belongs to the Greek church, who had fled thither for the sake of true religion.  For there is at this time such a persecution against them, that had they not withdrawn in time, they would have been destroyed long since.  Master à Lasco examined, by means of an interpreter, the principal of the brethren, who was an influential character among the people of Moscow, and who seemed to be superior to the others, both in authority, years, and knowledge of scripture; and he answered so readily upon all the chief heads of religion, and also upon the doctrine of the eucharist, that nothing could be better: whereupon we recognized them all as our friends, and owned them as brethren.  They informed us that, about the time of their leaving Moscow, about seventy noblemen were imprisoned on account of religion; and that they knew of more than five hundred brethren in Muscovy, who were favorably disposed thereunto.  Hence we perceive the admirable power of the Divine Spirit in God’s elect.  For these persons have not in any way derived their knowledge from our friends (for they do not understand their writings), but from those whom God himself has raised up by his Spirit in Muscovy.  The Ruthenians too, members of the Greek faith, who live at Wilna, and have their churches there, cannot endure the sight of these brethren; and, when they first arrived, they severely beat them for their departure from their faith; nor could they have dwelt here in safety by reason of the Ruthenians, had not the lord Palatine of Wilna taken them under his protection.  further, the king has now written to the bishops of his kingdom, who not long ago had met together in a synod, requiring them without further delay to set about the reformation of the churches, and that, not only as to matters of discipline, but also in respect to the worship of God; for, as he has lately intimated to the bishop of Rome, he can no longer delay the reformation of the churches without certain danger to his kingdom.  May the Lord God grant him by his Holy Spirit to make a successful progress in it, to the glory of his adorable name!
  But that the reformation which the king meditates next winter may be happily brought to pass, it will be necessary, at least in my opinion, to have some trustworthy leader in the whole business, to superintend the rest, both in modeling the reformation itself by the word of God, and, when it is so modeled, in carrying it into execution.  For if every one be at liberty to bring forward his own plans, and, whatever they may be, to obtrude them upon others at his pleasure, there can be no doubt but that the work of reformation will be unattended with success.  And again, supposing the very best plans were proposed, they would avail very little towards the well-governing of this church of God, unless there be some man of fidelity, and prudence, and experience in ecclesiastical discipline, to carry them into effect.  Wherefore, excellent sirs, it would appear well worth your while, especially in the infant state of this church, if (as your influence here is so great in all quarters, and even with the king himself,) you would commend master à Lasco, with whose fidelity and prudence (not to touch upon his other noble qualities) you are well acquainted, both to his majesty himself and to the palatine of Wilna, in letters sent to them for this express object, as master Philip Melancthon did not long since.  For otherwise it is to be feared that the reformation will not go on favorably, or at least the practical working of the reformation, however good it may be in other respects.  For it is certain that almost all persons here are novices, upon whom this duty cannot be imposed without most obvious danger to the church.
  All other matters you will readily learn from our honored father and brother, doctor Lismanini, whose fortune it is (so to speak) to be compelled by the providence of God to estrange himself for some time from this kingdom, which has hitherto been to him as his own country; and this for no fault of his, for he has deserved every possible favor both from the king himself and from this kingdom; but from the exceeding rage of Satan and the enemies of Christ the Lord, against which the king (such is his weakness) has not entirely been able to contend.  Meanwhile he has always expressed, and still continues to express, the greatest kindness towards master Lismanini, whom he wishes at this present time to sojourn with your church yonder, in preference to all the churches in any part of Germany.  And it cannot be doubted but that this trial is a proof to master Lismanini of the especial goodness of God, who is wont to manifest his mercy towards his elect by tokens and (as it were) badges of this kind.  And since all things work together for good to those that love God, I am persuaded in the Lord that this very banishment, which is otherwise so very distressing to us here, will tend both to his edification and comfort.  Were he to live, as David did, in Mesech or Kedar, namely, among a barbarous people and those who are destitute of all knowledge or fear of God, that kind of life would doubtless be very painful.  But the agreeable intercourse of most distinguished brethren, and the most holy assemblies and meetings of most learned and godly men, cannot but most exceedingly delight and comfort him, and render him better qualified for the service of the church of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ.  And this circumstance of itself, independent of any other consideration, ought abundantly to comfort us and our brethren in this place under this visitation of our brother.
  There was here not long since a person not altogether unknown to you yonder, who secretly endeavored to create a disturbance in these churches, and who is even now circulating dishonorable reports in Germany respecting master à Lasco, one who in every respect deserved well of him; and this he did likewise some little time ago in the greater Poland, whenever he had an opportunity, that is, among those whom he knew not altogether to agree with us on the doctrine of the sacrament; with the view of preparing the minds of some of the nobles here to receive the confession of Augsburgh.  While he was here, however, he conformed himself to us, and asserted and pretended that he entirely agreed with us; insomuch that he drew over into that opinion of him, besides many others, master doctor Lismanini, who is reported upon that occasion to have borne honorable testimony of the man to you at Zurich.  I have thought it right, consistently with my fidelity to the church of Christ, to acquaint you with these circumstances, that you may not be imposed upon by statements of this kind, but may rather oppose for the glory of God his calumnies and hypocrisy.  You will hear more concerning this man from master Lismanini.
  Farewell, most accomplished sirs, and esteemed masters and brethren in Christ the Lord, to whom I most earnestly commend you and your ministry, that you may bring forth abundant fruit unto life eternal.  Amen!  Salute, I pray you, most dutifully in the Lord masters Bernadine Ochin, and Conrad Gesner, and commend me to the Lord in your prayers.  I will requite you in like manner.  Wladislaw, June 23, 1557.
            Your most devoted,
              JO. UTENHOVIUS.

LETTER CCLXXVII. WILLIAM PETERSON TO CONRAD PULBERT.
unknown
unknown
  When I was about to write to you, my worthy Conrad, I was so greatly afraid lest, through my lack of knowledge, you would not be able to understand my letter, that I had almost given up the thought of writing at all.  When, however, I had duly considered your kindness towards me, and the request you made that I should write to you at least a few words, I could not refrain from doing so, however rude and inelegant my letter may appear.  As to the news which you desire of me, I have not any, except that the images, which formerly used to work miracles in England, are now, as I hear, broken in pieces, and the imposture of the priests is made known to every one.  And to mention to you one idol and imposture in particular; you must know that there was in England an image, which at certain times used to move its mouth and eyes, to weep, and to nod in sign of dissent or assent before the bystanders.  These things were managed by the ingenuity of the priests standing out of sight; but the imposture is now notorious to every person in England.
  I request of you, my worthy Conrad, that should any letters addressed to me, or any thing else come into your hands, you will forward them to me by that merchant, through whom, as you know, I have made provision for my letters to be sent to England; or else by John Butler, who is devoting himself to literature in the house of master Sapidus.  I am in doubt whether or not some letters have been forwarded to me, which I have not yet received.  Furthermore, I am about to return into my own country: wherefore, if there is any thing that I can do to serve you, let me know, and I will readily perform it to the utmost of my power.  Salute, I pray you, in my name, your wife and your mind.  And if at any time I have either spoken or acted as I ought not to have done, I pray you pardon me, and remember me in your prayers to the Lord.  Salute masters Bucer and Capito most lovingly in my name.  I would have written to them, had I possessed so much learning as to be able to write even tolerably; but I leave that duty to you.  Farewell in Christ our Lord.
          Yours, wholly,
            WM. PETERSON.

LETTER CCLXXVIII. JOHN FINCH TO CONRAD HUMPARD.
unknown
unknown
  John Finch wises to his host and singular good friend Conrad health and innocence of life.  The grace of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, be with all those who preach his gospel in purity and sincerity of faith!  Amen.
  When I had expressed to you, my kind friend, some time since, my intention of removing from you, and of endeavoring, under God’s guidance, to return into my own country, you earnestly and anxiously entreated of me this one thing, that I would in some way inform you of the state of our affairs, both here and in England, so far as we can obtain any true account of them from the merchants and booksellers.  Which request indeed though it seemed to me to be hard and difficult to comply with, by reason of my never having been conversant with business of this kind; I have not thought it right, my excellent friend, to decline this service, that this testimonial of our mutual friendship might hereafter be a constant memorial for our common use, so long as we shall be confined to this corruptible body.  But whereunto does this far-fetched exordium tend?  Certainly to this, namely, that I may be able in some measure to satisfy your inexhaustible thirst for learning, at least by my feeble and unadorned style of writing, when a more rich and elegant style is beyond my power.  But not to weary your refined ears any longer with my complaints and puerilities, I will come at once to the subject of your inquiry, and relate to you, as concisely as I can, the existing circumstances of the church in England.
  A certain German merchant here, who is well acquainted with the English language, told me as a certain fact, that all the images, which used to work miracles by the artifices of the devil and his angels, that is to say, the monks, friars, fish-eaters, and others of that stamp, were conveyed on horseback to London, at the command of the bishops: that a public sermon was preached from the pulpit of St. Paul’s to the congregation assembled in Christ; after which a certain image brought away from Kent, and called in English “The rood of grace in Kent,” was first exhibited.  The preacher, the bishop of Rochester, explained all the trickery and imposture in the presence of the people.  By means of some person pulling a cord, most artfully contrived and ingeniously inserted at the back, the image rolled about its eyes just like a living creature; and on the pulling of other cords it gave a nod of assent or dissent according to the occasion: it never restored health to any sick person, notwithstanding great numbers afflicted with diverse diseases were carried to it, and laid prostrate before it, unless some one disguised himself of set purpose, and pretended to be sick; in which case it would give a nod, as though promising the restoration of health, that it might by this means confirm its imposture.  Then again, by some other contrivance unknown to me, it opened and shut its mouth; and, to make an end of my story at once, after all its tricks had been exposed to the people, it was broken into small pieces, and it was a great delight to any one who could obtain a single fragment, either, as I suppose, to put in the fire in their own houses, or else to keep by them by way of reproof to such kind of impostors.  After this, bishop Latimer, in the western part [of St. Paul’s]. carried a small image in his hand, which he threw out of the church, though the inhabitants of the country whence it came constantly affirmed that eight oxen would be unable to remove it from its place.  There were, after this, exhibited many other tricks of the same kind, by which the simple were imposed upon by the priests; so that the ignorant people now call them more conjurors, and despise their contrivances, objecting the deceits they practiced against them, as long as the tower of Babel was safe, which, being now undermined, is daily threatening an overthrow.
  What must I say more, except to pray you diligently to salute in my name the indefatigable master Bucer, and his colleague master Capito, together with master Sturmius, and my no less esteemed friend, master Bedrot? and you will also dutifully salute in my name your wife, and the wife of master Bucer, together with John and the maid.  Here, believe me, you will find nothing else but what Lucian speaks of in his treatise on the proper method of writing history, people “turning their thoughts and imaginations upon whatever may chance to come uppermost.”  Farewell, and love me as you do, and write to me in return as soon as you have leisure.  I wrote to you and yours, but not to every one, lest they should expose me to ridicule for this unpolished letter.  Again farewell.
            Your most devoted,
              [JOHN] FINCH.

LETTER CCLXXIX. NICOLAS PARTRIDGE TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Frankfort
April 12, 1538
  Greeting.  I have received, most worthy master, from Froschover your most courteous letter written to myself, together with a parcel, as you call it, of letters and books written to the leading men in our kingdom: by which I easily perceive how greatly you endeavor to make those persons who are now most attached to you still more attached.  These bonds indeed have for a long time been too firm to admit the supposition of their being broken in this present life; so far are you from believing that we can ever cease to remember you here.  We are not however much pleased with that parenthesis of yours, if indeed it is worthy of being called such; for unless we would be considered as unfeeling and impious, we cannot but regard these your benefits as most highly valuable.  For (to say nothing of other infinite benefits) who but an impious man would think it a small matter to be rightly instructed in religion?  It would be impiety not to attend to such instructions with one’s whole heart, much more so not to take them in good part.  What you write besides, you write from the dictates of kindness itself.  We can with much greater justice entreat the same thing from you, and your most worthy family; and we also most heartily promise the same, that as long as we live we will be wholly yours, and you may always make use of us in that character.  We could scarcely read without tears what you wrote to us concerning your little daughter Elizabeth, so dear both to us and to all your friends: we hope that she has recovered.  Salute, I pray you, diligently in our name your most amiable wife and pious mother, together with all your family.
  We shall always most willingly comply with your injunctions, that we should send you information at every fair, both respecting the state of our kingdom and our own individual circumstances.  Our friend Rayner did not come to this fair, by reason, as I understand, of the recent death of his wife.  He has written to me, and Froschover will give you the letter, which I would not enclose in this, because I wish it to be first read by masters Butler and Traheron, who are now living at Strasburgh with master Sapidus; and especially by master Grynæus, because he particularly desired that I would send him information both respecting the state of our country and our own affairs, and those of other friends.  In the letter that Rayner wrote to me, and also in his letter to Froschover, he mentioned a certain Englishman from whom he wished us to gain full intelligence of every thing; but no such person, as far as we know, has arrived here.  A certain German, who belongs to one of the merchant companies residing in London, has told us some marvelous stories respecting some [images of] saints, which were formerly fixed and immoveable at some distance from London; namely, that they have now ridden to London, and performed most wonderful miracles in a numerous assembly.  Concerning the bearded crucifix of Kent, called in our language “The Rood of grace near Maidstone,” he told us, that while the bishop of Rochester was preaching at Paul’s cross to a most crowded congregation of nobility and others, in the presence too of many other famous saints of wood and stone, it turned its head about, rolled its eyes, foamed at the mouth, and poured forth tears down its cheeks.  The bishop had before thundered forth against these images; the satellite saints of the Kentish image acted in pretty much the same way.  It is expected that the virgin of Walsingham, and St. Thomas of Canterbury, and likewise some other images, will soon perform their miracles in the same place which, of what character they are, you may, I think, judge for yourself.  For the trickery of the wicked knaves was so publicly exposed in the image of the crucifix, that every one was indignant against the monks and impostors of that kind, and execrated both the idols and those who worshipped them.  God grant that we may really banish all idols from our hearts!
  Do you always especially remember us to God in your prayers.  My companions, Woodrooffe, Peterson, and Finch, who are all about to accompany me to England, salute you and your family.  Salute in my name masters Pellican, and Leo, and Theodore.  Make my excuse, if necessary, for not having taken leave of him.  I certainly cannot do otherwise than wish him every happiness, who has always deserved so well at my hands.  Farewell in the Lord, with all yours.  Frankfort, Apr. 12, [1538].
            Yours,
            NICOLAS PARTRIDGE.

LETTER CCLXXX. NICOLAS PARTRIDGE TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Frankfort
Sept. 17, 1538
  Much health.  Your information, most honored master, respecting the state of your church was exceedingly gratifying, as were also the salutations which you wrote word were sent by your excellent wife, and mother, and sweet children.  I heartily implore our good and gracious God not only to preserve you in safety, but to retain the church in this pure and holy religion.
  You shall now hear, in few words, about your book dedicated to the king, and what has been done with the copies sent as presents.  No sooner had we touched the soil of our country than we made diligent inquiry concerning the state of the realm; and we have ascertained from persons of good credit, that your influence had been much diminished by reason of that unhappy retractation of yours, I know not what.  We therefore addressed first of all the archbishop of Canterbury, who most courteously received the copy sent to himself: we offered him likewise, for civility’s sake, and that it might be received more favorably, the book intended for the king: at first he refused, and thought it would be much more advantageous if it were placed in the hands of the lord Crumwell, that he might deliver it to the king; but after supper he asked for the king’s book of his own accord, and promised to deliver it into his hands, provided we were present, in case the king should wish to ask us any questions.  He then set himself to the continued reading of the book, that he might not seem to recommend to the king any thing of which he himself had no knowledge.  He ordered us to come again after two days.  We then called upon the lord Crumwell: Eliot put into his hands your book addressed to himself; he received it very kindly, together with the letter, which he read through, notwithstanding he was overwhelmed with business.  That evening he went to court, having some business with the king, to whom he doubtless showed the book he had that day received.  As soon as [the archbishop of] Canterbury heard of this, he forthwith sent the king his book, at a time when we could not be present.  But that the gift was acceptable to the king, we collect from this circumstance, that his majesty expressed a wish to those around him, that it should be translated into English.  The archbishop promised to acquaint you with all these circumstances this fair.  But I called upon him five days before I was to leave England, and inquired whether he had anything to send you by me; when he replied, that he had not your letter by him, for that he had left it at his house fifty British miles distant from London, where he is now residing.  At the next fair you may expect letters from all.
  Our friend Eliot, I suppose, in his letter to you has made mention of the lord Crumwell, of Matravers and the Polsteds: bishop Latimer certainly inquired of me whether we intended to return to those parts; for that he would most gladly write in reply.  Nothing, believe me. was ever more gratifying to him in the whole course of his life, than the present you sent him.  At that time I could make no decided promise, but I know not whether he has written to you; for when I left England, he was more than two hundred miles from London, where I embarked.  Sir Edward Wotton received your book with the greatest satisfaction, and is diligently engaged upon it; and requested, that as he cannot write himself, I would let you know that he is wholly at your service, if he can oblige you in any way.
  Religion is making favorable progress among us.  By the order of the king, persons are sent to preach the truth in all parts of England. You have, I suppose, heard long since respecting the lady of Walsingham, and the breaking in pieces of the other idols.  The boiling flames of purgatory are now extinguished among us.  There is a great dispute about private masses: for the ambassadors of the duke of Saxony and the Landgrave of Hesse are still residing in London, and are almost every day at the archbishop of Canterbury’s palace at Lambeth, engaged in disputations touching religion.  They promise us very favorably, and we cannot but hope very favorably for ourselves.  You will learn the remainder of the news from master John Butler.  pardon me, that I cannot now write more.
  I have sent you some British cloth, which will make you two pair of hose, one white and the other black; and also six pair of Oxford gloves.  You will give one pair to master John Butler, and a pair each to your wife, mother, brother and his wife.  I wish it were in my power to gratify you in greater matters; but I know meanwhile, that you will take these things in good part.  Salute, I pray you, your wife most dutifully in my name, your mother, children, brother, master John, in a word your whole family.  You will receive also from Froschover the Roman coin, which Michael Drumæus, who has now written to you, made me a present of.  I wish you would write back to him at the next fair, and send also a letter to master Richard Tracy, the father of our friend Traheron; for he greatly admires you, and by so doing you may, I hope, be of service to Traheron.  I send you, as you see, six little books, not by way of a return for those you sent me, but that meanwhile I might testify my remembrance of you by some trifling present.  Farewell and happily.  Frankfort, September 17th.
            Yours wholly,
              NICOLAS PARTRIDGE.
  P.S.  I wish some one would copy out for me your discourses on St. John.  I would reward him well and faithfully.  I think that in England people use to polish their pewter dishes with Flemish chalk.

LETTER CCLXXXI. NICOLAS PARTRIDGE TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Dover
Feb. 26, 1540
  I return you many thanks, most courteous and deservedly dear master, for your kindness in writing to me, not only respecting your own state, and that of your friends, but also respecting the condition of your highly favored church.  The whole account was most agreeable and gratifying to me; and I wish that I could give you an equally favorable account of ourselves in return.  Not but that we are upon a sufficiently sound footing, but that all things to not as yet succeed according to our wish.  I doubt not but that you will obtain every information from the merchants.  But since you have sent me such excellent tidings respecting your church, I will also relate some circumstances not perhaps to be despised.  There does not exist here a single monk, at least in name.  Punishment has lately been inflicted upon three principal abbots, who had secreted property to a great extent, and had conspired in different ways for the restoration of popery.  Good pastors are freely preaching the truth, nor has any noticed been taken of any of them on account of the articles you mention.  The king, who is exceedingly merciful, would willingly desire the promotion of the truth; and to this end he has desired certain bishops to consult with respect to the selection of twelve monasteries, where boys might be piously and holily brought up in all kinds of useful learning.  But this is all we hear of these things at present.  The assembly of the peers, or, as we call it, the parliament, is proclaimed for the 8th of April.
  As to myself, I am residing with a most honorable and worthy man, master Antony Ancher, the mayor of Dover, as tutor to his children.  He has requested me to salute you very much in his name.  I should most willingly have sent the gloves, had not your letter reached me so long after its time: for what you wrote on the 20th of August I did not receive till the 26th of February.  I will send them, however, by the first opportunity.  You will receive from me at this fair, by the hands of Rayner, a golden angel, for you to pay the boy Christian, as is proper, for his trouble.  I am now expecting the annotations of Bibliander on the Proverbs and on Job: I should like also to have your own commentary on St. John’s gospel, and also what you are now preaching upon his epistle.
  Salute from me your most honorable wife, your dear mother, your sons and daughters; also Rodolph Gualter, to whom I would most willingly write at this present, did time permit.  I am surprised, however, at his not having written to me this fair, which indeed no one would easily make me believe, but I should rather conclude that his letter has been intercepted by some mischance.  Present to him from me an English crown, and also one each to your other and wife, as a token, if you please, of our old and constant friendship.  I return you my best thanks for your most agreeable present, namely, the books sent by Froschover: I am expecting them this fair by Rayner, who will give to Froschover for you a pair of Oxford gloves.  This, however, is rather my master’s present than mine; for he gave them to me for this purpose a little before I wrote this.  Farewell, and may you be happy.  February 26.
            Yours wholly,
              NICHOLAS PARTRIDGE.
  P.S.  Salute also, I pray you, in my name that illustrious assembly of learned men, those venerable elders, masters Pellican and Leo, the most erudite Bibliander, master Megander, master Ammian, master Binder, &c.  Once more farewell.

LETTER CCLXXXII. ROBERT BARNES TO JOHN ÆPINUS.
London
May 21, 1540
  You do me injustice, my Æpinus, when you accuse me of pride.  I wrote to you in a familiar way as our friendship warranted, but you misunderstood my feeling.  You will learn from the bearer of this letter all the circumstances respecting myself more clearly than I can write them.  I have explained every thing to him.  Write, I entreat you, to Philip [Melancthon] in my name, as soon as possible, that he come not hither before he receives a letter from me; for I would not have him exposed to danger by reason of any hopes he builds upon me.  For I have been deceived myself; only you must desire him not to say a word about me.  I will send you a person of reputation, in whom you may place your confidence no less than in myself, and I will entrust him with every thing.  A fierce controversy is going on between the bishop of London, Gardiner, and myself, respecting justification by faith and purgatory.  He holds that the blood of Christ cleanses only from past sins previous to baptism, but that those committed since are blotted out partly by the merits of Christ, and partly by our own satisfaction.  He adds too, that voluntary works are more excellent than the works of the ten commandments.  As to purgatory, he says, that if a woman shall have caused masses to be celebrated, and shall have bestowed alms for the soul of her husband, she may boldly demand his soul in the day of judgment, and say that she has paid the price of his redemption.  But I, on the other hand, in opposition to all these things, vindicate the efficacy of the blood of Jesus Christ my Lord; but hitherto I stand alone in doing it.  For although many persons approve my statements, yet no one stands forward except Latimer.  You shall hear the result of this controversy.  Only write to my masters that they pray for me.  Salute the minister of St. James’s, masters Dethlef, Geskinbuge, Abelke, Peter Hesterbergh, Herr Jochim the miller, and others.  My circumstances are no better than they were.  Farewell.  London, May 21.  From the house of Thomas Parnell, to whom you will forward your letters.
          Yours from my heart,
                R. B.

LETTER CCLXXXIII. NICOLAS ELIOT TO HENRY BULLINGER.
unknown
Aug. 21, 1538
  Since our friend Partridge is now coming to you, and will give you much more information than I can convey by letter; and since you know him to be a man of perfect integrity, who can neither counterfeit nor play the hypocrite, you will not, I trust, take it unkind, if your friend Eliot does not at this time write to you so fully, as under other circumstances his duty would require.  I therefore earnestly beg and entreat you willingly to listen to and diligently to question Partridge, who is now supplying the place and discharging the duty of a letter from me.  And as he will give you the true state of almost all our affairs here, this one thing you must know as a most certain truth, that your books are wonderfully well received, not only by our king, but equally so by the lord Crumwell, who is keeper of the king’s privy seal, and vicar general of the church of England.  You would have received a proof of this from themselves before this time, had not, as far as I can understand, this sole obstacle intervened, that in monarchies, where in a manner only one individual is wont to manage all differences and causes whatsoever, they are of necessity compelled, if not altogether to omit many duties, yet certainly to be very dilatory in performing them.  But your writings have obtained for you a reputation and honor among the English, to say nothing of other nations, beyond what could possibly be believed.  Wherefore I pray Almighty God long to preserve you in safety, and not to suffer you to lack that spirit, by which you may persevere in writing more, not only for the use and benefit of the English alone, but of his whole church.  Amen.  Farewell.
  I return you my best thanks for your exceeding kindness, and favor, and good-will to myself, and for the letter of master Matravers, written to the two Polsteds my kinsmen; by which you have not only brought them to regard you with the greatest kindness and respect, but have also made them, from being my friends, now my greatest friends.  I beg you to take in good part these gloves, which I have sent by Partridge, both to yourself, and your most worthy and excellent wife and mother, as a slight present from a poor friend; and moreover salute them together with your whole family very much in the name of Eliot.  Again farewell.  Aug. 21, 1538.
          Yours,
            N. ELIOT

LETTER CCLXXXIV. NICOLAS ELIOT TO HENRY BULLINGER.
unknown
unknown
  Greeting.  Though I am aware, most honored master, that I am so indebted to the great and singular kindness you have always manifested towards me, as that I am unable to return it by any offices, exertions, labors, or industry of my own; yet reflecting that there is no greater proof of an ungrateful mind, than not to acknowledge an obligation when one is unable to repay it, I have determined to write you something of a letter, wherein I might testify my feelings towards you, declare my good-will, and, lastly, return you my thanks for your many and great favors: although I am well aware that I owe you far greater thanks, and that I entertain much higher sentiments respecting you than I am able to express in words, however copious or magnificent.  Wherefore, if I do not now write to you so much as both my inclination and duty require, pardon, I pray you, my want of utterance, and be persuaded, as I hope you will notwithstanding, that whatever I may be, I am entirely yours.  For I call him to witness, who inspects most intimately all the recesses of the human heart, that there is no one whom I regard with greater affection than yourself, no one whom I more look up to, esteem, and admire, and to whom I am more united than yourself; and deservedly so in respect of yourself, the remembrance of whom is now my only consolation; as I consider it no trifling portion of my happiness to have seen you, to have conversed with you, to have lived with you in your own house, and to have had one for a master, who has imbued my mind with such lessons of faith and piety, and taught me by such an example of a life so upright as yours, that I ought to wish for nothing more earnestly than that I may prove myself a worthy scholar of so great and excellent a master: which I will certainly strive to do to the utmost of my power, and diligently endeavor that I may never be wanting in any opportunity of time or place, wherein I may consider myself able to perform the duty of a grateful pupil towards his master.  Meanwhile, I do not cease to implore Almighty God in constant prayer, that he may very long preserve you in health and safety, not to myself only, but to his church.  For the benefit of which church, with your usual desire to promote the glory of Christ, you would, I know, long since have published not only your commentaries on Isaiah, but also your other lucubrations, had there not stood in the way (excuse me if I speak too freely) that injurious persuasion of your mind, by which, though your writings are universally approved, yet they never satisfy yourself; so that if you do not altogether think lightly of them, yet you allow them much less importance, and think far more humbly of yourself, than their worth and the great and rare qualities bestowed upon you by God justly demand.  Not only the church of Zurich, but all other churches which are in Christ, bear witness to the skill, and purity, and simplicity of faith, with which you have expounded the whole bible, and especially the epistles of St. Paul.  And how great weight all persons attribute to your commentaries, how greedily they embrace and admire them, (to pass over numberless other arguments,) the book sellers are most ample witnesses, whom by the sale of your writings alone, from being more destitute than Irus and Codrus, you see suddenly become almost as rich as Crœsus.  May God therefore give you the disposition to publish all your writings as speedily as possible, whereby you will not only fill the coffers of the booksellers, but will gain over very many souls to Christ, and adorn his church with most precious jewels.  Thus far upon this subject.
  I would here let you know how very gratifying was your letter, and with how great kindness we were every where treated for your sake, and what moreover is the present state of our affairs, were I not aware that my companions have long since done this by their letters, so that there is no occasion for me to repeat it.  We have certainly every where experienced your kindness, so that we cannot say that we have only had you present with us at Zurich.  In short we are living in prosperity, and this among excellent men, studious of godliness, and great admirers of you.  Farewell.
  I should ask you to receive with kindness this my hurried letter, did I not know you, as I am constantly declaring you, to be the kindest person alive.  I pray and entreat you therefore most earnestly to salute very dutifully in my name those illustrious persons, masters Theodore Bibliander, Leo Judæ, Pellican, Batt, Binder, and the other godly men; and let them not regard my not having now written to them as arising either from forgetfulness of their kindness, or of my own duty; but they must ascribe it partly to that excessive difficulty in writing, by which I find myself involved in more than labyrinthine entanglements, and partly to the hasty departure of the bearer.  For there is nothing which I would not most willingly do to gratify those, to serve whom is receiving the greatest kindness for one’s self.  I love them heartily, s they deserve, and wish them every good, and am daily speaking well of them, and sounding their praises, as I do not cease to do also respecting yourself.  Once more farewell.  Salute for me, I pray, your very dear brother.  Our most courteous host, and your great admirer, master Antony Honorius, president of the college at Ripen, salutes you much.  Now for the third time farewell.

LETTER CCLXXXV. JOHN BUTLER AND B. TRAHERON TO JOHN CALVIN.
unknown
unknown
background: Wrtten about 1537
  We wish you the true joy in Christ.  May as much happiness be appointed to us from henceforth, as our going away from you has occasioned us sorrow!  For although our absence, as we hope, will not be of very long continuance, yet we cannot but grieve at being deprived even for a few hours of so much suavity of disposition and delightful conversation.  And this also distresses us in no small measure, lest there should be any persons who may regard us as resembling flies, which swarm every where in the summer, but disappear on the approach of winter.  You may be assured that, if we had been able to assist you in any way, no pleasure should have called us away from you, nor should any peril have withdrawn us.  This distress indeed, which the disordered tempers of certain individuals have brought upon you, is far beyond our power to alleviate.  But you have one, Christ Jesus, who can easily dispel by the beams of his consolation whatever cloud may arise upon your mind.  He will restore to you a joyful tranquility; he will scatter and put to flight your enemies; he will make you gloriously to triumph over your conquered adversaries; and we will entreat him, as earnestly as we can, to do this as speedily as possible.  We have written these few lines at present, most amiable and most learned master Calvin, that you may receive a memorial of our regard towards you.  Salute in our names that individual of a truly heroic spirit, and singular learning and godliness, master Farel.  Salute too our sincere friends master Olivetan, and your brother Fontaine.  Our countrymen send abundant salutations.  Farewell, very dear friend.
              JOHN BUTLER,
              BARTHOL. TRAHERON.

LETTER CCLXXXVI. JOHN BUTLER, NICOLAS PARTRIDGE, NICOLAS ELIOT, AND BARTHOLOMEW TRAHERON TO HENRY BULLI8NGER.
unknown
unknown
  Health in the Lord!  Had we any thing else in our power, we should be ashamed to offer our thanks, and nothing but thanks, since your numerous and ample favors towards us demand the performance on our part of whatever we can promise in words.  But since our ability is far more limited than our wishes, we are doing as others do for fear of doing nothing, although perhaps with greater sincerity; namely, we desire to thank you to the uttermost of our power for the singular kindness you manifested towards us both at other times, and especially on our departure.  We had a very pleasant journey to Berne, except only that the absence of one so dear to us as yourself sometimes distressed our minds.  The friends to whom you so kindly gave us letters of recommendation entertained us with more than common courtesy.  A great part of this their kindness we place to your account, who did not think it enough to treat us courteously yourself, without causing the same conduct to be manifested by others.  We acknowledge the extent of your kindness, and confess ourselves therefore to be entirely yours, as long as we can be our own.  We have here no means of repaying our obligations.  All that we have in England consider to be yours as much as any thing that belongs to you.  We hope you will not think it a trouble to salute diligently in our name master Leo Judæ, master Pellican, and that chief ornament of Switzerland, yea, rather of the whole world, Theodore Bibliander; the kindness of all of whom, as well as their rare learning, we regard with such veneration as that we never can forget them.  Farewell, master Bullinger, who are, on so many accounts, so dear to us.
            JOHN BUTLER,
            NICOLAS PARTRIDGE,
            NICOLAS ELIOT,
            BARTHOLOMEW TRAHERON.

LETTER CCLXXXVII. JOHN BUTLER AND OTHERS TO CONRAD PELLICAN AND OTHERS.
London
March 8, 1539
  To the most excellent and learned men, and their revered masters in Christ, Conrad Pellican, Leo Judæ, Henry Bulklinger, and Theodore Bibliander; John Butler, Nicolas Eliot, Nicolas Partridge, and Bartholomew Traheron wish salvation through Jesus Christ.
  One cause, most accomplished sirs, of our unitedly addressing you in the same letter, is that we have all of us assembled together at London; but our chief motive is, that you may know us to be so joined together in one mind and one sentiment, that out of many is made as it were one man.  And the reasons which have impelled us to write are these; that we might assure you of our retaining a suitable remembrance of your extraordinary kindness, and inform you at the same time both of our own situation as individuals, and of the general condition of this realm.  But neither the magnitude of the subject, nor your own courtesy will permit us to use many words in returning our thanks for your singular good offices towards us.  Let it suffice to assure you that we will return your kindness, should you ever be in a condition to require it, as far as may lie in our power.
  We pass on then to the state of this our kingdom, which is as follows: the ceremonies are still tolerated, but explanations of them are added; so that now the holy water, as it is called, is for no other purpose than to refresh our minds with the remembrance of the sprinkling of the blood of Christ; the bread signifies the breaking of the body of the same; the pax, which is wont to be carried about, sets before our eyes the reconciliation of God and man.  These things are retained for the sake of preventing any disturbances, and are ordered to be kept up until the king himself shall either remove or alter them.  Nothing has yet been settled respecting the marriage of the clergy, although some persons have very freely preached before the king upon this subject.  The mass is not asserted to be a sacrifice for the living and the dead, but only a representation of Christ’s passion.  All images that are objects of worship are removed.  We doubt not but that you have heard that the principal supporters of popery among us have been cut off, namely, the marquis of Exeter, Montague, earl of Salisbury, and that very brave but very profligate man, sir Edward Nevill.  Not long since, too, Nicolas Carew, who had been the king’s master of the horse, was brought to punishment.  As he was being led to execution by the king’s order, he exhorted all persons to a diligent study of the evangelical books; for that he himself had arrived at so shameful a death by reason of the hatred that he formerly bore to the gospel, as he had been notoriously addicted to the popish religion.
  There is a report that we are to have war with the French, the Italians, the Spaniards, and the Scots at one and the same time.  When the secret machinations of the persons above mentioned were reported to the king, he said that he should not sleep at all the worse for it; and on the day after he declared to his privy councilors, that he now found himself moved in his conscience to promote the word of God more than he had ever done before.  The pope has not only procured the burning of three English merchants in Spain, but has granted remission of sins to any one soever who shall kill an English heretic.  You will entreat God on our behalf not to suffer thee madmen to trample on his servants.  We have a king of a noble and magnificent spirit, and skilled in military affairs even to a miracle.  We have too a people, as we hope, sufficiently obedient to their sovereign, now that the heads of the rebellion are, as you know, taken off.  With the help of your prayers we doubt not but that all will be well.
  You shall now hear somewhat concerning ourselves.  John Butler would have come to you, had he not been restrained by these warlike tidings.  The same cause has kept Nicolas Partridge from the Frankfort fair.  The former indeed, if he wished, might have an honorable post about the king; but smitten with the love of the muses, he seems to have an abhorrence of a courtier’s life.  Nicolas Eliot is studying our municipal law, and is in no small degree aided therein by the munificence of the king.  Bartholomew Traheron is in the service of the lord Crumwell, and Nicolas Partridge in that of the pious bishop of St. David’s in Wales.  He will be one of the readers in divinity till better provision can be made for him.  We are all of us as yet unmarried.  So much for our individual circumstances.  The archbishop of Canterbury has promised to write to you, most excellent Bullinger.  He is now wholly employed in instructing the people, and in composing some discourses in English, which our clergy are to use instead of those Latin ones which they have hitherto prated in their churches like so many parrots.
  The letter of our friend Bibliander has been delivered to the bishop of Worcester, who will, we think, send him an answer.  Take, most learned sirs, in good part this unpremeditated statement, and fare ye well.  Salute very much in our name your wives and all our friends.  March 8, 1539.  London.
        JOHN BUTLER, wholly yours.
        NICOLAS ELIOT, yours.
        NICOLAS PARTRIDGE, yours.
        BARTHOLOMEW TRAHERON, yours to command.

LETTER CCLXXXVIII. JOHN BUTLER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Basle
Feb. 24, 1540.
  Peace and all blessing through Jesus Christ!  On the 12th of January I received letters from our English brethren, Richard Hilles and Peterson, the purport and substance of which I purpose to lay before you in this present writing, inasmuch as it seems necessary for you to be acquainted with them.  And, not to weary you with a lengthened letter, I will endeavor to explain every thing in few words.  The state and condition of that kingdom is much more sound and healthy since the marriage of the queen, than it was before.  She is an excellent woman, and one who fears God: great hopes are entertained of a very extensive propagation of the gospel by her influence.  There is now no persecution, except of the victuallers, of which sect a certain impostor of the name of Wattis, formerly of the order of wry-necked cattle, is now holding forth (O shame!) in the stocks in Canterbury bridewell, after having been accustomed to mouth it elsewhere in opposition to the gospel.  Alas! for the changeable nature of all things; for, as the preacher says, there is nothing lasting under the sun.
  Meanwhile, the word is powerfully preached by an individual named Barnes, and his fellow-ministers.  Books of every kind may safely be exposed to sale; which fact is so important to my excellent friend Froschover, that I have thought it right to make him acquainted with it.  More than all this, wonderful to relate, the monasteries are every one of them destroyed, or else will be before Shrovetide; of the most opulent of which, namely, Glastonbury and Reading, the two abbots have been condemned for treason, and quartered; and each of them is now rotting on a gibbet near the gates of the abbeys over which they respective presided.  A worthy recompence for their imposture!  I have now performed my promise.  Further, these good men affectionately salute you: one of them, as he has pledged himself to me by letter, will ere long be with you in person as a living epistle, for the sake of carrying away the bows for which he bargained with Schentizius and others at Glaris last year.  I pray you therefore, most esteemed master Bullinger, for his sake, to make such arrangements with those men, that Peterson may not come to no purpose.  Lastly, I entreat you, by the Lord Christ, to have compassion upon this exiled and destitute Scotsman, who is the bearer of a commendatory letter to you; and, if I do not seem to ask any thing improper, to promote and befriend his purpose and cause.  I will manage, God willing, by means of the father of the family, the things that you ask of me in your letter.  Farewell in the Lord Jesus, and may be preserve you and all your family in safety as long as possible.  Dated February 24.  Salute, I pray you, in the Lord, all your fellow-ministers.
            Yours heartily,
              J. BUTLER.

LETTER CCLXXXIX. JOHN BUTLER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Basle
March 29, 1540
  A letter from Peterson, written in England on the 31st of January, was brought to me at Basle on the 24th of February.  It contained no news whatever.  The kingdom continues in the same condition that I described to you in my last letter: there is however great hope that it will ere long be in a much more healthy state; and this every good man is striving for in persevering prayer to God.  As to other matters, I will not now mention the loss incurred by W. Peterson in the purchase of his wood; which, God willing, he will soon explain far more clearly when he sees you.  But it is chiefly owing to his own fault, for not having taken better care to procure sound wood, when he first made his bargain at Glaris.  Before he left this place, I told him plainly, upon the very first sight of his bow-staves, that when he arrived in England, he would repent of having undertaken a journey for the purchase of wood of that kind.  And I was too true a prophet, for which, upon his account, I am very sorry.  But no one must think me for this reason to possess any peculiar sagacity; for the very material of the bows gave the clearest intimation of such a loss before he left Basle.  For, whereas each bow-stave ought to be three fingers thick, and squared, and seven feet long, and to be got up well polished, without any knots, scarcely one of them answered to this pattern and description.  he therefore most earnestly entreats you, in his letter to me, that you would be kind enough to acquaint those individuals with the damage he has sustained, that they may try all the pieces by the pattern I have just described, (though I am afraid the warning will come too late,) lest he should lose his labor and money a second time as he did before.  Do you therefore, I pray you, act in this business according as your kindness towards him shall dictate.  Farewell most happily in the Lord!  Moreover, salute for me, I entreat you, your amiable wife and all your family.  Basle.  About 11 o’clock at night, March 29, 1540.
          Yours from the bottom of my heart,
              JOHN BUTLER.
  I have not yet learned whether you have received the Roman coins.

LETTER CCXC. JOHN BUTLER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Basle
April 4, 1540
  Peace and a tranquil conscience through Christ!  Your friends Nicolas Partridge, Bartholomew Traheron, and William Peterson, not so successful as a merchant as he is exemplary as a Christian, salute your reverence, most worthy sir, very earnestly in the letters which I have received from them this last fair by my very excellent friend Froschover; and they return you their warmest thanks for the favors which you have conferred upon them.  I have not forwarded to you their letters, because they are written in English:  I should otherwise have certainly done so, and most willingly; not so much that you might ascertain for yourself from their own writing what they require, and other things, which for their sakes, unless I would be esteemed most ungrateful, it is necessary for me to mention to you; as that I might disburden myself of the labor of writing, which, to speak candidly, is my greatest plague.  I will therefore, if I can, acquaint you in few words with the substance of each of their letters.  That of Partridge states that he has sent you, by Reyner, and English piece of money called an angel; but that honest man had given some other money to Froschover, (for what reason I cannot tell,) which I received from him, that he might comply with the wish of Partridge, and gave him in exchange for the German coin an angel, which I happened to have by me:  he earnestly entreats you to satisfy, with this money, your scholar Christian for the writings which he presented him with.  He expresses a wish, too, that, if it can be done, the lucubrations of master Theodore upon the Proverbs and Job may be forwarded to him by the same person: he states that Christian undertook to do this.  Your present, the works of master Zuinglius, of revered memory, upon the four gospels, has not yet reached him; but he is expecting it from Reyner when he arrives.  He will send you the Oxford gloves at the earliest opportunity, for he has not yet had it in his power either to write or to ride over thither to procure them, (as your letter was delivered rather late,) he being so intent upon his employment of instructing the children of a gentleman in Kent.  As to news, since he writes nothing but uncertain rumors, I shall omit all mention of it, until I see the event.  Peterson, whom I expect to arrive about Whitsuntide, will certainly, by God’s guidance, give us every information in person.  He earnestly requests you in the mean time to charge Schentzius to thoroughly polish and ornament the bow-staves: he must make each of them square, as far as he can, and at least three fingers wide in every part.  He must observe the length of that which he left with him for a pattern.
  Bartholomew [Traheron] describes [in his letter] a sermon of the crafty bishop of Winchester, which I have sent by Froschover to my preceptor, master Theodore [Bibliander].
  Master Grynæus sends the enclosed piece of money as a present to your excellent wife, whom I entreat you to salute in my name, together with her mother and the whole family.  Salute, I pray you, most diligently in my name my host master Pellican, together with all your colleagues.  Farewell happily in the Lord at all times, and pray him, I entreat you, to have mercy upon me.  Basle.  Apr. 4.
          Yours entirely,
              J. BUTLER.

LETTER CCXCI. JOHN BUTLER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
unknown
May, 1540
  Peace and a quiet conscience in Christ!  I am in daily expectation of the arrival of Peterson; for in his letter, dated in the month of March, he fully determined to be here about Whitsuntide.  Should he not come, it is certain that he has been apprehended in his journey through France.  I hope better things, relying upon the mercy of God.  But should it be the case, we English, God permitting, will take care that Schentzius shall not suffer any great loss; unless indeed I should be deprived at the same time of all that I possess in England.  In that case my service will be of little avail, but he will, I doubt not, be aided by other good men.  I am writing in this strain, because England is now in a most disturbed state.  But I will not write about this, as I am persuaded that Peterson will shortly tell you every thing from his own mouth.  Besides, want of time will not now permit me to write more upon this subject.  But you may easily imagine, most excellent Bullinger, according to your discretion, the rest of our misfortunes from this, that three of our best ministers are confined in the prison which they call the castle, or, if you choose, the Tower of London.  I shall, moreover, proceed straight to Frankfort for the sake of comforting some brethren who are voluntary exiles from England.  As soon as I return, you shall know more, if the Lord will.  Farewell most happily in Christ, together with your wife and all your family.  Salute, I pray you, all your colleagues in my name in the Lord.  Again farewell.
            Yours heartily,
                J. BUTLER.
  P.S.  Pray the Lord, I beseech you, that he will deign to pity our condition.

LETTER CCXCII. JOHN BUTLER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Basle
Nov. 10, 1542.
  Peace and every blessing from God our Father through Jesus Christ our Lord!
  Our brother, J. Burcher, has lately written a letter in common to my brother Richard Hilles and myself, in which he mentioned your kindness to him, namely, in your active exertions, my very dear master Bullinger, with the magistrates of Zurich, to second his endeavors to procure wood for making bows.  He told us that this kind of wood is produced in great abundance in a certain wood belonging to the authorities of Zurich; from whom, relying on the aid of your good offices, he hoped to obtain a license for selecting trees suited to his purpose.  In the first place therefore, most loving master Bullinger, we return you our lasting thanks for this your kindness and active exertions in behalf of our countryman.  Furthermore we pray and entreat you in the Lord to continue to help him as you have begun.  He seems to be an honest and godly youth, and one who, for the sake of our religion, is extremely attached to yourself.  Wherefore we have no doubt but that you would have been ready to serve him of your own accord, even though we had not written to you upon this subject on his behalf.  Which indeed we have done more with a view of awakening your remembrance of him amidst the laborious occupations by which we are well aware that from the nature of your office you are constantly overwhelmed, than because we had any doubt of your readiness to notice him of your own free will, whenever your engagements should afford you an opportunity.  We will desist therefore from addressing you more at length upon this subject.  What need is there of many words? or by what means can we requite your good offices, and those of your colleagues, conferred upon us recently when we were at Zurich?  Truly we cannot tell; unless we may seem to have satisfied our obligation in this respect, that our inclination is always ready, and there will be afforded us, God willing, the ability, such as it may be, of requiting your kindness.  We request you therefore to return especial thanks to your co-adjutors in the name of us all, namely, to masters Megander, Pellican, Erasmus, and all the rest.  Further, my brother’s wife affectionately salutes all your wives.  She also returns her thanks for your wife’s letter so kindly written to her in German, and says that she will answer it in the same language as soon as she conveniently can.
  You perhaps wish to be informed as well of the disturbances in Germany as of those in England.  Every one is aware that the affairs of Germany are distracted on every side by their too great fear of war, far too great indeed, as all persons allow, for the well-being of the state.  Nor do I suppose you are ignorant that almost the whole duchy of Juliers (sad to relate) has been ravaged and desolated with fire and plunder by the imperial forces.  In Hungary too a standard-bearer of Strasburgh with his soldiers, and another officer said to be of Ulm, were entirely cut to pieces at the siege of Pest, by which slaughter the rest are said to have been thrown into such consternation that they were compelled to retreat.
  The English, moreover, (by what spirit they are actuated I leave you to determine) have proclaimed a deadly war with Scotland, unless she will agree to these conditions of peace, namely, to banish the pope from the kingdom, to raze the monasteries, and to prohibit the worship of saints: all of which things, the monasteries excepted, this Proteus obstinately retains in his own kingdom with more than tyrannical cruelty.  In fine, there will be peace with Scotland, if she accept our terms: if not, a terrible war is before us, with the soldiers in arms thirsting for blood.  There are, including the forces both by land and sea, a hundred and twenty thousand of English and Irish troops.
  As to my own affairs, if you wish to know them, they are in this state.  My brother and his wife are both well, and as to myself, to speak candidly, I am much better than I deserve; but I have now for fourteen months been suffering severely enough (unless God deem otherwise) from a quartan fever, to the great detriment of my property.  But I have now been recommended by some persons to change the climate; for the air of Strasburgh is very prejudicial to me this winter, by reason of its humidity: reason dictates to me the same thing, forasmuch as a paroxysm does me more mischief there than any where else.  On this account I have determined, by God’s blessing, to winter at Basle; where if I can be of use to you in any way, you will, I hope, always find me entirely at your service.
  I pray you, my good friend, dutifully to salute in my name master Theodore Bibliander, my gossip and preceptor; and I desire my salutations to your wife and all your family.  Farewell, and may Christ very long preserve you to us for the advancement of his glory.  Basle, Nov. 10, 1542.
          Your most devoted,
              J. BUTLER, Anglus.

LETTER CCXCIII. JOHN BUTLER TO THOMAS BLAURER.
unknown
Feb. 16, 1550.
  Greeting.  Although I doubt not, most excellent sir, that you can obtain far more accurate information as to the affairs of England from others than from myself, yet from my ancient regard for you, as well as your good-will towards me, I would not be wanting in this duty, nor omit to represent to you in few words the accounts I have myself received from that country.  Receive them therefore as follows.  John Hooper, that individual who was so long engaged in the study of divinity at Zurich, and who resided at my house during our most wretched calamity at Constance, has lately written to me.  The affairs of pure religion are now, through the mercy of God, in a more favorable position, considering the state of infancy and rudeness of our nation.  Baptism, for instance, and the Lord’s supper are celebrated with sufficient propriety, only that some blemishes in respect to certain ceremonies, such for instance as the splendor of the vestments, have not yet been done away with.  The psalms, hymns, and collects, in fine, whatever is done in the churches, is said and sung in our own language.  Our friend Hooper (as I learn from another quarter) is lecturing in theology at London twice a day, (for he is a public professor there, though in our own tongue) with the entire approbation of all good men.  Besides this he frequently preaches both at court and in other places all over London.  He has for some time been lecturing upon the Psalms at the king’s palace.  Very many of the aldermen of London, who were veteran papists, have embraced Christ.  In a word, the truth is especially flourishing in London beyond all other parts of the kingdom.  In other places too the harvest is great, but faithful laborers are few; though of hirelings and idlers (as is generally the case) there are more than enough.  The late protector too of the kingdom, through the innate compassion of the king towards him, when in the judgment of all persons it was thought he would be beheaded, is by the providence of God released from prison, and not only has his life given him, but is also restored to the greatest portion of his estates, with the condition however of being deprived in future of any share in the government.  He lives as a private individual, and chiefly upon his own estates; for even now twenty thousand crowns of yearly income are allowed him, and formerly he had very much more.
  It remains for me, most excellent sir, to remind you touching the payment, at the day appointed (namely, the first of March next ensuing), of the money you borrowed from me; which nevertheless, so God love me, I do most unwillingly.  But I am now so circumstanced that I cannot any longer do without it: for I am desirous of purchasing a small estate; in which event (which I expect will shortly take place) I shall have occasion for five hundred florins from whatever source I can procure them.  I therefore entreat you with all the earnestness in my power, not to disappoint my expectation in this matter.  Farewell, and be always valiant in Christ.  My wife desires to salute you and your wife, together with your family.  A long farewell.  Feb. 16, 1550.
        Yours wholly,
            J. BUTLER.

LETTER CCXC IV. JOHN BURCHER TO RODOLPH GUALTER.
Basle
1540
  Health in Jesus Christ!  Did I not know, my very dear friend Gualter, your exceeding good sense and sobriety of character, I should endeavor at some length to shake off this grief under which you are suffering from the death of your friend Partridge, and altogether to restore you to yourself.  But since to offer comfort to one who by reason of his singular strength of mind is well able to be his own comforter, will seem obtrusive and presumptuous; omitting all other considerations, I shall content myself with this single observation, that in a world so corrupt and uncertain it is a far happier thing to die with honor than to survive with shame.  For how can it be otherwise than shameful to worship wood and stone, and to count a piece of bread for a God?  But this, you will say, was not the case with partridge.  I allow it: and lest at any time he should have acted thus by compulsion and against his inclination, God has prevented him by an early death.  Being taken away therefore, he is now living happily and everlastingly, that he might not be forced to experience the extreme malice of his family, and to witness the just retribution that would come upon them on account of this malice.  There is reason therefore for you to rejoice.
  But you will say, How can I rejoice when I am deprived of the society of so dear a friend?  I know indeed that many friends like him are not easily to be met with.  And yet, what if you should take to yourself Burcher to supply his place, to whom you have never been less dear than you were to Partridge?  True, the like intimacy has not yet existed between you and him; but yet his regard for you may admit of a comparison with that of the other.  Come then, my Gualter, and let us strive each of us in the duties of friendship to excel the other.  Friendship is a bond; and the various duties of life, united with kindness, diligence, and love, most firmly bind this bond and hold it together.  You have done me no small service in making your mother, as it were, a mother to myself; and in providing a father for me (I speak of Myconius and his wife) in the place of my own; to say nothing meanwhile of your most agreeable manners, in which you far excel all the Germans whom I have ever seen.  I have no means of recompensing you for so many distinguished marks of your regard, except by endeavoring not to show myself ungrateful by being silent respecting them.  But should you under any circumstances require my services, you shall not find me ungrateful.  Do you then, shaking off all sadness, as far as you possibly can, be thinking about new friendships; and, that you may no longer be kept in suspense as to where I am, I have now for some months left Strasburgh, and been living with Myconius (at Basle), where, on my return, I first lived with Oporinus, and afterwards with Michael Falcon, as they call him.
          Yours,
            BUCHER, Anglus.
  Salute all your friends in my name, especially Haller.

LETTER CCXCV. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Dec. 31, 1546.
  Health in Christ Jesus!  After so great a change has taken place in our prosperous condition, I cannot refrain, my very dear friend and master, Bullinger, from communicating to you the evils that are impending over the church in Germany.  A messenger of the king of England has this day arrived at Strasburgh, having yesterday left the camp of the emperor, and the emperor himself at Heilbrunnen, in the territory of Wirtemberg.  He brings word that the emperor is exceedingly elated with his success, and more than usually cheerful.  For having heard those persons who had voluntarily surrendered call themselves rebels, he said, “Though you are rebels, yet I will nevertheless show you how merciful I am.”  These were the words of the emperor to the magistracy of some city who had surrendered themselves.  He added moreover, that he said not a word about religion, and that he only imposed upon them a pecuniary fine.  This was no doubt his policy, that he might not appear inconsistent with himself.  But if he should be allowed to bring the whole of Germany into subjection, he will assuredly show how subtle he is.  Besides, the dread of him has overspread the whole territory round Strasburgh, nor is this city in expectation of any thing but a blockade.  The count de Buren too has taken possession of a small town near Frankfort, the name of which, if I am not mistaken, is called Darmstadt.
  So much respecting Germany.  The messenger brings us news from England as agreeable as the above account is distressing.  It is to the effect that there was a certain nobleman, commonly called the duke of Norfolk, whose authority extended towards the north of England, who was a most bitter enemy to the word of God, and who, with his son and others, made a secret attempt to restore the dominion of the pope and the monks.  But their design is discovered, and the duke, together with his son, is thrown into prison; nor is any one wanting but Winchester alone, and unless he also be caught, the evangelical truth cannot be restored.  Let us then pray the Lord, that he may defend his church which is oppressed on every side.  These things I have thought proper to inform you of.  I shall depart from hence, the Lord being my guide, straight towards the sea.  Farewell.  I have written to my wife, whom I pray you to comfort and advise during my absence.  Strasburgh, Dec. 31, 1546.
              Yours,
                BURCHER, Anglus.
  P. S.  Richard [Hilles] and his wife salute you and your wife affectionately.  They have had a daughter born to them about six weeks since, and she has recovered from her confinement.

LETTER CCXCVI. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Jan. 30, 1548.
  Much health.  Although I have but little occasion to write, I cannot refrain, my very dear friend Bullinger, from troubling you with a few lines in this moment of leisure.  Shortly after my arrival at Strasburgh I sent you, at the request of master Richard [Hilles[, a most worthy man, a certain copy of the answer of a very learned man, and one of great judgment in the scriptures, to the letters of Bucer which had repeatedly been sent to him in order to draw him over to his own opinion concerning the eucharist, and bring him into this error respecting the humanity of Christ.  As you have never acknowledged the receipt of this book, master Richard wished me to ask you, that we might know whether you have received it; and this is the principal reason of my writing.
  We have no news from England, except that our council, which we call the parliament, is prorogued to the first of April.  Bucer has been sent for, as it is thought, by the emperor, and left this place secretly for Augsburg about eight days since.  We are surprised at the secrecy of his departure, and some fears are entertained about his return.  Such, it is reported, is the firmness of the duke of Saxony, that he will by no means make any agreement with the emperor to the detriment of religion.  May the Lord grant unto all the godly perseveance even unto the end!  Salute all my brethren at Zurich.  Farewell.  
              Yours,
                BURCHER, Anglo-Tigurinus.

LETTER CCXCVII. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Aug. 24, 1548.
  Much health.  On the twenty-second of this month our very excellent and singular good friend master Richard Hilles, with his pious wife and dear children, left Strasburgh on their way to England.  Your letter, most excellent sir, was just brought to me yesterday, and I opened and read it according to his request before he left.  I have long since both received, and duly forwarded to the archbishop of Canterbury, that book and letter which you sent me by that filthy Jew, Michael Adam, who, however, very much deceived my expectation.  He borrowed from me three florins, and from master Richard, in my absence and without my knowledge, eight dollars.  He left this place a short time after the fair, but, as I hear, not without previously losing a great sum of money at the gaming-table; so that, if I am not mistaken, the sum we lent him is lost, unless there should possibly be some assets with you, whereby both your countrymen and ourselves may be indemnified.  Should there be any thing, I request you to help us.  He boasted that Froschover was about to give him a hundred florins for some book which he had translated from the Hebrew.  But this perhaps is not true.  Pray do for me what you can, if there is any hope of recovering any thing.
  We are much distressed at the slaughter of the people of Constance; but much more so that, notwithstanding they are conquerors, they think of falling off.  May the Lord Jesus have compassion upon us all!  We have not heard any thing for a long time respecting the state of England, neither any tidings of John à Lasco.  Should I hear any thing, I will take care to let you know.  There is some doubtful report respecting the English and Scots: I therefore pass it over till we receive more certain information.
  Master Richard and his wife requested me, on their departure, to salute most dutifully yourself, your wife and children, and also all the learned ministers of your church.  I will send him the book which I have now received, by the first convenient opportunity.  I will also write in my own letters to him the heads of yours; for he requested me to do so, both with respect to yours and those of all others.  You are again saluted most dutifully by my wife, together with your wife, children, and household.  May the Lord keep you very long steadfast in the confession of our Lord Jesus Christ, and bestow the same grace upon me!  Amen.  The emperor, I hear, is daily expected at Spires.  Farewell.
          Yours, whom you know, J. B.

LETTER CCXCVIII. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Oct. 29, 1548.
  Praise to God alone!  Health and peace in Christ Jesus our Savior.  Your letter, dated the 20th of this month, has partly delighted and partly distressed me.  Your own good health, my very dear Bullinger, and that of your family, was not the least cause of my satisfaction; but that Constance has acted so iniquitously against itself and against the great and gracious God, is indeed most depressing.
  The condition of our England is such as I can neither much commend or find fault with.  A more sincere and pure feeling of religion has begun to flourish with success; but Satan, through his hatred of this, has been endeavoring to throw every thing into confusion by means of dissension.  The archbishop of Canterbury, moved, no doubt, by the advice of Peter Martyr and other Lutherans, has ordered a catechism of some Lutheran opinions to be translated and published in our language.  This little book has occasioned no little discord; so that fightings have frequently taken place among the common people, on account of their diversity of opinion, even during the sermons.  The government, roused by this contention, have convoked a synod of the bishops to consult about religion.  God grant they do not produce some prodigy!  So much respecting religion.
  The English army, consisting of about thirty thousand men, marched last month into Scotland; on the arrival of whom the French returned into their own country.  Some of our ships encountered them in the channel, and took from them a large vessel called a galley, with three hundred troops on board; together with some ships, which they brought into harbor at Calais.  It is rumored here, that the French have carried off the queen of Scotland; but of this I have no certain intelligence from England.  The French are threatening a war with the English; it is not known what will be the result.  If there is any nation more perfidious than another, it is France, who will some time, I doubt not, receive the reward of her perfidy.
  Strasburgh still remains in the same state as heretofore, and is not changed in any respect.  If indeed bad morals could be changed into good ones, I doubt not but that we should have our God and Father in heaven favorable to us.  The preachers are crying out most vehemently; but though they may cry till they burst, they do but little good.  We have however many good and worthy individuals.  Strasburgh is certainly most happy in one respect, that the nobles and more wealthy inhabitants have for the most part left it.  Pray for this our church, that God may be favorable to her: for we have need of your continual prayers and those of your whole church.  I will take care that the letter you sent shall be safely conveyed to England.  May the Lord preserve you and your city!  Labor, as you are wont, for the extirpation of vice, that we may have God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ favorable to us.  My wife very dutifully salutes you and all your family.  Tell them I wish them all holiness and happiness.  Salute all the faithful.  Farewell!  Dated as above.
  John à Lasco, a man very like yourself, endued with all learning and piety, is now in England.
            Yours, J. B.

LETTER CCXCIX. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Jan. 22, 1549.
  Honor to God alone!  Much health.  I cannot sufficiently wonder, my very dear friend and master, Bullinger, at the negligence, not to say the abominable carelessness, of some of your townsmen, who are so neglectful in the delivery of letters.  I gave the son of old Binder a letter to my intimate friend John Hooper:  I gave also another to one of your townsmen who has lost one of his hands, (and heretofore, if I am not mistaken, a basket-maker by trade, who is now selling cloth in this place,) for the same Hooper, in which, because I was pressed for time, I enclosed a letter in English, sent to me here, and which I wished him to communicate to you.  From this place too, about six days since, I wrote a letter to Basle, to a certain inhabitant, Valentine Nussbaum; to which I annexed my letter written to your excellence, and which I earnestly entreated him safely to forward to you.  I sent also an English letter in addition, which I gave in charge to master Hooper to interpret to you.  If none of these letters have reached you, it will be a misfortune which I will remedy by this present writing; for I will briefly touch upon their contents.
  And, first of all, the letter written in English, and sent by the lame man, contains the following intelligence.  Our king, about the month of September or October, fitted out some ships for Scotland, to carry provisions to the workmen and soldiers who are employed in the erection of some fortifications for the protection of a certain harbor, (which they have taken possession of by force,) and to prevent an enemy from entering.  As soon as the soldiers and sailors had arrived there, they disembarked, and made an attempt upon a town named Dunbar, lying in the immediate neighborhood.  On the first attack, when they were just about to retreat, they were rallied by the bravery of their officers: for about thirty of our countrymen were slain, which was the cause of their running away.  They repeated the attack a second time, when the governor of the city was slain, and the rest, both townsmen and soldiers, took to flight, leaving the town empty.  Our troops therefore gained possession of it.  But when they perceived that it was not sufficiently fortified, and discovered that the entire army of the Scots would come up with them on the following day; having taken all the plunder they could, they pulled down the walls, and, alas! set fire to the city.  The affair being thus accomplished with success, they returned in safety to the rest of their party to the ships, with a great quantity both of gold, and silver, and household stuff; and also with a very considerable number of beasts of burden sheep, and horses.  After this defeat, the Scots, it is thought, sent ambassadors, and began to sue for peace.
  This was the substance of the first letter.  The second related to matters of religion, and the discussion which lasted for three days between four bishops, namely, the archbishop of Canterbury and another, called Doctor Farrar, on the part of the gospel, and the bishops of Worcester and Westminster on the side of popery.  Nothing, however, is as yet decided, nor is there any public preaching.  But, as I hope you will receive that letter, I pass over the rest.  I will not however omit this truly discreet reply which our young king made to the protector.  When the disputation was ended, the protector accosted the king with an expression of his surprise, saying, “How very much the bishop of Westminster has deceived my expectation.”  “Your expectation,” the king replied, “he might deceive, but not mine.”  When the protector further inquired the reason, “I expected,” said the king, “nothing else but that he, who has been so long time with the emperor as ambassador, should smell of the Interim.”  A reply truly becoming the young king, and which I did not think right to omit.
  But to pass on to Richard Hilles, he begs that you will excuse his delay, and he will write as soon as he has leisure.  His affairs have hitherto prevented him, and also his absence from London.  For on his first landing he was afraid to go thither with his wife and children, by reason of the plague, which was exceedingly prevalent in those quarters.  And he is now entirely occupied in arranging his house.  Commend me, I entreat you, most diligently to masters Hooper and Butler.  Our Strasburgh remains in the same state as heretofore.  The Lord grant that it may long continue so!  John à Lasco was in England, nor have I heard from any of my friends either of his death or that he has left it, which master Richard certainly would not have omitted to mention.  Gabriel too, the tanner, tells me that he has not heard any thing of the kind.  Farewell.
            Yours, J. B.

LETTER CCC. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Jan. 28, 1549.
  Much health.  My friend Gabriel, most courteous Bullinger, has saluted me from you, and stated at the same time that you were anxiously expecting a letter from me: but since I have hitherto had nothing worth relating, why should I be the means of your wasting your valuable hours in trifles and foolish gossiping?  Nevertheless, since an occasion, such as it is, has now presented itself, I cannot be silent.  My dear friend and your great admirer, master Richard Hilles, has written me word that he has received your letter, and has desired me to tell you so.  He has not had time to answer it; besides which, as you are aware, he does not readily write in Latin.  He will, however, answer it shortly.  The news he communicates is partly agreeable, and partly very distressing: agreeable, because it is hoped that some improvement at least will take place in religion, although not a perfect and complete one.  Yet in the mean time those very persons who wish to be, so to speak, most evangelical, imitate carnal licentiousness, under the pretext of religion and liberty.  Every kind of vice, alas! is rife among them, and especially that of adultery and fornication, which, he tells me, they do not consider as a sin.  Unless this evil be corrected, we are undone.
  I would have written more, but the messenger will not allow me, for he is in great haste.  Wherefore you shall hear the rest by the enclosed English letter, which Hooper will translate.  I have written to him concerning the victory of the English over the Scots, in what manner they gained possession of the city.  I hope he communicated the tidings to you.  Our Strsburgh remains just the same as heretofore, and the report respecting it and the bishop is all false.  Pray continually for us!
  Farewell, and salute all our learned friends.  Inform, I pray you, master Butler, that Richard has also received his letters.  Again farewell.
                Yours, J. B.

LETTER CCCI. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER
Strasburgh
Feb. 15, 1549.
  Health in Christ Jesus our Lord!  Amen.  Within these few days, my dear friend Bullinger, these letters have been brought me by the courier, and together with them my friend Richard has written me most horrible intelligence; which however, I hope, has had a happy result, though it must nevertheless be a distressing and lamentable one.
  The uncle of our king (I do not mean him whom we call the protector of the kingdom, but his brother) has attempted, by an unheard of treachery and cruelty, to destroy with his own impious hands, in the deep silence of the night, our innocent king.  The tragedy was thus acted.  He obtained from one of the king’s chamberlains, who was privy to his design, a key, by means of which there is the nearest access by a door to the royal bed-chamber, which he entered in the dead of night, accompanied by the accomplices of his crime.  There was a space between the door at which he entered and the king’s chamber, where was lying hid a little dog, the most faithful guardian of the youth, having been accidentally shut out of the chamber; and when he perceived the assassin hurry towards the king’s chamber-door, he betrayed the murderer by his barking.  The enraged assassin first killed the dog, and, had not God prevented, would have killed his master also.  A faithful guardian of the royal person, roused by the noise, came out, having awakened some of those who from their office are called body-guards.  As soon as he beheld with astonishment the murderer at the door of the royal chamber, he demanded of him what was his business there at the very dead of night.  The man replied with trembling, that he wished to know whether the prince was safely guarded.  But this excuse did not avail him, and on the next morning he was committed to the Tower of London as a traitor; as was also shortly after the king’s chamberlain, who had supplied him with the key by which he gained admission.  And unless the king had accidentally bolted the inner door of his chamber, which is done very seldom, it would certainly have been all over with him, before that other person could have run to his assistance.  Together with the traitor was seized also a certain knight who was the warden of the king’s mint at Bristol, which is the richest sea-port in England.  Here then you have the happy issue of this tragedy.  They have, I doubt not, suffered at length the due punishment of such wickedness.
  Give, I pray you, or send the letters tied up with this to the parties to whom they are addressed.  Our Strasburgh is languishing: the bishop is daily expected.  Three propositions were made to the preachers by the magistracy; That they should not speak ill of the emperor and the princes in their sermons, to which they agreed; That they should receive the religion proposed by the government, to which they consented, provided it were agreeable to holy scripture; and thirdly, That they should not utter a word against the Interim.  This they refused to comply with.  They are only waiting for an answer, and I am afraid they will have to remove somewhere else.  John à Lasco is alive and well in England.  And may you also be alive and well!
            J. BURCHER.

LETTER CCCII. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
March 12, 1549.
  Greeting.  A lamentable and distressing circumstance has happened to us at Strasburgh.  Bucer, and the more eloquent, as well as in my opinion the more solidly learned Paul Fagius, have been deposed from their office of preachers by the authority of the magistrates; and, unless they prefer being delivered into the hands of the emperor, they will be obliged to quit the city.  We still have the other preachers, and no other change has taken place than that we are compelled to eat fish during this Lent, and on Fridays and Saturdays throughout the year.  The bishop is expected every day: should he make any change, you shall hear of it by a letter from me.  I have just received a letter from England, but it does not contain any news.  Nothing has yet been published by act of parliament.  The son of the emperor is coming to-day to Heidelberg, as it is reported, accompanied by duke Maurice and others.  I hear from Saxony that the Saxons are indignant at having been driven from the gospel to the Interim.  It is rumored that the sea-port towns have returned for answer to the emperor, that they cannot receive the Interim.  A truce is said to have been made between the king of Wallachia, Poland, and some duke, of Silesia, if I mistake not, and the sea-port towns.  I have written thus much to you, in few words, that you may not accuse me of neglect.  My affairs are now calling me elsewhere, and will not allow of any longer delay.   Our friend Hooper has written me word, that the Swiss have all come to an agreement: I wish it may be true; but I desire to know the same from yourself.  Farewell.
          Yours, you know who,
                J. B.

LETTER CCCIII. JOHN CURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
April 1, 1549.
  Greeting.  I have received, my very dear friend Bullinger, your two most friendly letters, the first by Farell’s brother, and the other by my friend John Hooper, who arrived here with his family, by God’s blessing, two days since, safe and sound.  And I congratulate, not only you Swiss, that you have so happily come to an agreement among yourselves, but also the whole of Germany; for this event will be of the greatest advantage to all the Germans.  May the great and good God grant that the peace now entered into may be lasting, firm, and perpetual!  Our city is daily declining.  Two preachers, Bucer and Fagius, have been dismissed by the authority of the senate: Paul has departed, and the other will depart very shortly.  May the Lord preserve our England from both of them!  We still have preaching among us, and not massing; yet the bishop is anointed, and has celebrated mass once.  The whole clergy too of his district are to meet to-morrow at Saverne, to consult about putting down Christ and his gospel.  But the Lord will, I doubt not, scatter the counsels of the ungodly.
  I have no news from England, except that an engagement between the English and Scots took place last February; and our troops lost by treachery the fortress they had before taken.  But the battle took place shortly after, in which many Scots and French were slain, and manyh taken prisoners; among whom were twelve of the French nobility and the commander of the French forces in Scotland.  It is rumored here that a marriage is about to take place between the widow of the duke of Lorraine and the brother of the king of Hungary.  May the Lord give us his grace, and preserve his people!  Amen.
            Yours entirely,
                J. B.
  P. S.  The traitor who plotted the death of our king was condemned to death on the 12th of March, and there is no doubt but that he will be brought to execution.

LETTER CCCIV. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
May 30, 1549.
  Much health.  Your last letter, my very dear friend and master, Bullinger, I have received by the hands of a Polish nobleman; by which I perceive you are surprised at not having received any accounts from England, either from master Richard [Hilles] or Hooper, or any one else.  I dare answer for our friend Richard that he is not forgetful of you, but that he will write, as he promised, by the first opportunity.  He is prevented however, not only by some affairs of importance, but also by his want of expertness in writing Latin, with which he is wont to charge himself; or rather I should say, his fear of writing incorrectly.  Besides this, he is not accustomed to be a retailer of mere rumors and reports, but a relater of truth.  And for this reason he very seldom writes to me any news, though what he does write is generally true.  I have therefore no doubt but that, as soon as he knows any thing certain and true respecting the state of our England, he will write both to you and to myself upon the subject.  A book upon religion has been set forth, and this too with the consent of the nobility and the whole council, which we call the parliament; but it is not yet printed.  I doubt not but that he will send it you as soon as it shall be published.  Bucer and Paul Fagius have safely arrived in England, and have written to this place from the palace of the archbishop of Canterbury.  I wish they may not pervert him, or make him worse.  John a Lasco has left England, but intends to return thither.  John Hooper with his family arrived safely at Antwerp, and are at length in England.  He wrote to me from Antwerp, and desired me to salute you, together with the whole church, in the name of himself and his wife.
  There are no tidings of the emperor, except that he is still at Brussels, though it was reported that he had gone to Ghent.  It is moreover stated that he is about to visit Spires, and it is certain that the people of that place have prepared apartments for himself and his attendants; but the more prevailing report is that he will not come.  The king of France, according to custom, is breaking the treaty and peace with England.  For he made a violent attack upon Boulogne seven times in one day, but much to his discomfort: for every time he suffered a repulse, and with no small loss of his troops.  The Scots, relying on the promises of the French, are becoming insolent, but to their great cost; for two hundred of them have been slain in a second conflict with our troops, and five hundred taken prisoners.  The emperor, as I hear, has granted our king ten thousand infantry, and five hundred cavalry, for the defense of Boulogne.  I wish it were permitted me to write about peace rather than war.  The French king has not acted without due prudence in inviting the Swiss to the defense, or rather the recovery, of Boulogne: but the Swiss will act most imprudently if they accept his invitation; for it is at too great a distance from you.  I wish, however, the Swiss would interpose between these two sovereigns, so as to treat about a peace, and that upon certain equitable terms, by which it might be established and placed on a sure footing.  For there is reason to fear that, while the mouse and the frog are fighting together, the eagle will devour them both.
  I have this to write respecting our Strasburgh, namely, that, contrary to all human expectation, we are still in the same state as heretofore; no change has taken place, except that festivals, the Interim, and fast-days are ordered to be observed.  Earnestly entreat the Lord for us, as well in your private as in your public prayers, and render him thanks with us for this his divine benefit.  Salute your wife and all our learned friends in my name.  Farewell.
            Yours,
              BURCHER, Anglus.

LETTER CCCV. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
June 1, 1549.
  Greeting.  My very dear friend Bullinger, after I had sealed my former letter, and was anxious about the means of sending it, I accidentally fell in with that nobleman of Ghent, who was intending to go into your parts.  He is alike distinguished by his birth and manners, as by his faith and piety.  He lived some time at Strasburgh, from whence he passed over into England; and has now come to the Wildbaden here for the sake of bathing.  It is his intention, when he leaves the baths, to visit some places which he has not yet seen, and especially Zurich, celebrated above the rest both for its reputation and pure doctrine.  He does not disagree with us in point of religion, and is moreover a man of learning and of godly judgment.  He will remain with you about a fortnight.  he desired an introduction to you from me:  I therefore, most courteous Bullinger, commend him in such a manner, that he may not be less welcome to you and to the church, than any Zuricher is, and ever will be, to me.  He is a disciple of the French church, the doctrine of which is not different from your own.  All that remains, I am sure that you will do of your own accord, when you have seen the man two or three times.  Farewell.
            Yours, wholly, 
              BURCHER.

LETTER CCCVI. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Aug. 25, 1549.
  Greeting.  The report of the evils which have befallen our England, most courteous Bullinger, has doubtless extended even to you.  But as such rumor is usually doubtful and uncertain, I have thought fit to give you a correct statement both respecting the demands of the rebels, and the cause of the rebellion; as also respecting the penalty and punishment which they have suffered according to their deserts.  In the western part of England, which is divided into Cornwall and Devonshire, these rebels assembled in the months of June and July last, to the number, it is believed, of sixteen thousand armed men.  The leaders of the rebels, in the first place, proclaimed deliverance to the people from the injustice and oppression of the nobility, who, partly by force, and partly by fraud, had converted to their own use the pastures which had formerly been common.  And for this cause the rebellion extended through all parts of England; insomuch that there was scarcely any place in which there were not some disturbances on account of it.  But the peasantry were every where immediately pacified by the king’s proclamation and promises, except in the abovementioned counties of Devon and Cornwall.  In those parts two Romish priests, who were the authors of the sedition, warned the people that their religion was in danger, and that it was the duty of all Christians to be prepared for its defense and re-establishment.  They assembled, therefore, so large a number of papists in the name and authority of Christ and the king.  The king wrote to them, admonishing them as a father to desist from the rebellion they had begun.  I send the document to Butler, who will translate it for you.  They disregarded the admonition, and began openly to declare their intention of setting up another king, another council, and another religion, as appears by their articles turned into Latin.  The king, being now compelled to it, attacked them as enemies with a regular force, destroyed three or four thousand of them, and delivered the city of Exeter, which they had besieged; whereupon some of the leaders of the rebellion were taken prisoners, and all the rest dispersed in diverse quarters.  There still remain some rebels in another part of England, who, relying on the aid of those above mentioned, excited a tumult.  Against these the protector of the kingdom advanced in person, with a large body of troops, at the beginning of this month.  They have, therefore, I hope, received the punishment of their rebellion.  In the mean time, while these things are going on in England, the king, or rather the tyrant, of France (for you are aware with what tyranny he raged against the Christians at Paris not long since, when he made a pompous entry into the city, how he ordered five persons most cruelly to be burned for his sport and amusement,) has declared war against our king and kingdom; having previously got ready troops at sea, who, as soon as war had been declared, were immediately to invade the west of England, and join the disaffected in those parts.  But the Lord prevented this calamity: for when it was told our people that the French had arrived and landed their troops, they hastened to the spot, cut off their retreat, and prepared for battle; and there the whole of the French army was destroyed, so that it is written to me by one worthy of credit, that there was not one left alive.  The number of the French, he thinks, was five, or at least four thousand.
  Thus much I have to relate to you concerning the present state of our England.  There is also a report that all the people of Switzerland had formed an alliance with this cruel tyrant of the French; and when I inquired of my informant whether the people of Zurich had also agreed to that treaty, he answered in the affirmative.  But I cannot believe your countrymen are so mad, as to enter upon a treaty with this tyrant, who seeks for nothing else but his own aggrandisement and the establishment of his kingdom.  I wish to know the truth of the matter from yourself.  Master Richard and his wife very much salute yourself and your wife.  My wife also dutifully salutes you both.  Pray the Lord for us and for our England!  Farewell.
            Yours from my heart,
                BURCHER.

LETTER CCCVII. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Sept, 1, 1549.
  Greeting.  I commended to you, most courteous Bullinger, not long since, a nobleman of Ghent, who was on many accounts deserving of my commendation and of your friendship.  I now commend to you by this letter an English gentleman, who is in no respect inferior to the other.  He is agreeable and quiet in his demeanor, and in matters of faith agrees with your church.  He has lived with me for some time, and I have not found any thing in him to find fault with.  He is a valetudinarian, by reason of a consumption with which he has been long afflicted.  If, therefore, your climate agrees with him, I request you not to be wanting in your good offices to find him a host, with whom he may be allowed to live somewhat after his own way.  He would like to board with master Gesner; I request you, therefore, to introduce him to him.  I wrote all the news to you about eight days since: he will tell you all the rest.  My engagements will not allow me to write more.  I therefore commend you and your family to God.
            Yours,
            BURCHER, Anglus.

LETTER CCCVIII.JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Sept. 25, 1549.
  Greeting.  Your most courteous letter, my very dear Bullinger, was delivered to me at Frankfort, where my engagements would not allow me to write to you in reply.  I consider your very friendly offices in serving my relative, as bestowed upon myself, which I will repay to you and to your friends whenever an opportunity shall be afforded me.  He is a youth of an exceedingly gentle disposition, but rather slow, as is generally the case with persons of that character.  For in proportion as any one is of a sharper wit, he is generally more rough in his temper; while, on the other hand, a person of a meek disposition is often wanting in ability.  This, however, may be remedied by application, as I myself have found to be the case in the present instance.  For when I was with you some time since, the stimulus applied by me was of more advantage to him than the more lax management of his master without such incentive.  If, therefore, you desire him to become a scholar, an active master must be sought out for him, who may urge and spur him on;  and I have thought it right to give you timely notice of this, lest my advice, by coming too late, should disappoint the expectation which you have conceived of the young man.
  I have received information from England, that the rebellion is entirely ended, and that the principal perpetrators of the crime are daily brought to punishment; especially those impure mass-priests, who stirred up the people.  The French have gained possession by treachery of two fortresses between Boulogne and Calais.  There is a report (but I consider it to be a false one) that the emperor will shortly come to Spires.  In your last letter you mention some damaged cloth which you had received; but I cannot tell what you mean by this cloth, for, as far as I know, I never sent you any.  Farewell, with your dear wife.  Master Richard [Hilles] salutes you:  he informed me in his last letter but one that his wife was very ill, and he desires you to commend her to the Lord in your prayers.  Again farewell.  Salute master Butler, and tell him that I have received his letters long since, and forwarded them to England.  I have not received any letters for you from England.
        Yours entirely,
          BURCHER, Anglus.


LETTER CCCIX. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Oct. 16, 1549.
  Perpetual health in Jesus Christ our Lord!  Your letter, my dear friend and master, Bullinger, has given me great pleasure on two accounts; both because you and your family were in good health, and not forgetful of me, and also that my kinsman John had been kindly received by all good men.  I will not fail to give him such advice, as that he may satisfy your expectation.  It is his want of application alone that will do him any harm; and as you are aware of this defect, it will easily be remedied.  He lived with me most creditably some time since, and gave me great hopes of his becoming a good man; and I pray our great and gracious God that he may turn out to be such.
  The report respecting a renewed rebellion in England is entirely false: for I received by the courier, about eight days since, a letter from our friend master Richard, dated at London on the 18th of September; and also another, written at Antwerp on the 28th of September, in neither of which was there any mention of any thing of the kind, but quite the contrary; namely, that as affairs were now settled in England, the king had determined upon sending all his forces against the French, to drive them away from Boulogne, and to succor the inhabitants of that place.  A rumor has again reached us, that the king has recovered the fortresses, and routed the French forces.  I wish it may be true.  But as soon as I know the facts, I will communicate them.  The report respecting the slaughter of the English, at the taking of the fortresses from the French, was without foundation; for I have been informed by a letter from Antwerp, that the French gained possession of those fortresses by treason.  The report in reference to the artillery that was taken was probably a true one.
  The rumor of the emperor’s coming to us is very general.  Nothing however is certain, except that I have head from a worthy man that James Sturmius was the author of this report.  It is not the plague, but a most acute fever, that is prevalent among us.  I do not however think of moving my quarters, were the plague to come a thousand times over.
  No misfortune, that I am aware of, has happened to master Hooper; but, as I have been informed by a person worthy of credit, he is very busy in confuting Lutheranism, and planting the truth.  He is performing the duty of an earnest Christian.  He is giving public lectures in London, where he has a numerous auditory, and is praised by all good men.
  The wife of master Richard [Hilles] has recovered from a very dangerous illness.  For a whole month her life was despaired of.  Bucer too has recovered from a fever.  But master Richard has written me word, that there was scarcely any hope of Paul Fagius’s recovery.  Acquaint, I pray you, Christopher Hales with whatever news you may think proper.  I thank you exceedingly on his behalf for having received him so kindly.  Salute him from me, together with your whole family and all your learned friends.  I pray the Lord long to preserve you in safety!
            Yours, BURCHER.
  After I had written this letter, and before it was sealed, I received letters both from master Richard and from Antwerp, in which there is no mention of any insurrection.  They were dated at London on the 28th of September, and at Antwerp on the 5th of October.  Master Richard wrote word that the bishop of London had been committed to prison, because he refused, though commanded by royal authority, to preach against the rebels.  Tell this, I pray you, to my countrymen.  Master Richard and his wife (whose health is daily improving) salute you and your family.  It is reported, by those however who have apostatised from the faith, and who place all their hopes on him, that the emperor is coming to Spires about the first of December.  The bishop of London is deposed from his dignity.  He was accused by Hooper and another on points of doctrine.

LETTER CCCX. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Dec. 12, 1549.
  Health and peace through Jesus Christ our Lord!  The many kind offices you fulfilled towards me, when I was at Zurich, will not allow me to be unmindful of my promise, though in the midst of numerous engagements.  You desired me, my dear friend Bullinger, to write frequently, which I am now beginning to do, though I have scarcely any thing to write about.  Whatever news there may be from England, you will doubtless learn from the letters of our dear friend Richard Hilles.  Nor indeed have I received any tidings, except that a certain individual, named Paget, a man excellent in every way, has been made president of Wales.  Where Wales is, and who Paget is, Butler and Hales will explain to you.  Every thing else remains in the same state and order, as when the protector was committed, respecting whom not a word is mentioned, except that he is still kept in prison.
  There is great uncertainty respecting the emperor’s coming to us, and it is not thought that he will visit us before the spring.  The mass-priests, together with the bishop, are endeavoring to bring back the mass to us at Christmas.  We are waiting to see what will be done.  May the Lord Jesus Christ for his mercy’s sake keep us inviolate from all error.  Amen!
  I return both you and your wife my lasting thanks for your very great kindness towards me.  Salute her in my name and in that of my wife.  Send, I pray you, the enclosed letters by trustworthy couriers, the one to Arau, the other to Constance.  There is an excellent woman, whose husband has now for a year past been in the service of a widow lady at Constance.  He promised to return hither by Christmas, but has now written to the contrary.  His wife has written to him in reply, and desires her letter to be safely conveyed to him as soon as possible.  Farewell.
            Yours,
              BURCHER, Anglus.

LETTER CCCXI. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
April 20, 1550.
  Health and peace through our Lord Jesus Christ, our only Savior and our life.  Your friend Froschover, my very dear Bullinger, amidst the bustle of the Frankfort fair, has brought me a letter and some books, which he desired me faithfully to convey by a safe hand into England; and your very acceptable letter contained the same request.  I have willingly performed this office.  There happened to be here a servant of my very faithful friend, master Richard Hilles, whom he had sent to me upon especial business.  To this man I entrusted the book and letter to the king, together with all your other letters.  The remainder of the books I declined to give into his charge, and not without reason.  For in the first place, it is becoming that the king should be preferred to others, and receive his copy before any one else, lest that which might be more acceptable from its rarity should become less so from being made common.  The two remaining copies, therefore, which belong to Hooper and another, I enclosed in some goods, which I took care should be forwarded direct from Antwerp.  I ordered the servant to give the letter and books to master Richard, to whom I also wrote to forward the same to Hooper.  The name of Hooper is celebrated throughout all England.  He is appointed a royal preacher, and is an opponent of Lutherans and Bucerians, but a constant defender and promoter of the true faith.  His praise is universally proclaimed both on account of his innocency of life and strictness of discipline.  May the Lord accomplish what he has begun by him!
  Bucer has had a most dangerous relapse into his old disease.  Richard writes word that there is little or no hope of his recovery.  In case of his death, England will be happy, and more favored than all other countries, in having been delivered in the same year from two men of most pernicious talent, namely, Paul [Fagius] and Bucer.  From these sources new sects are daily arising among us, and religion is always assuming a new appearance.  I really think that our men of learning delight in novelty and change:  moreover they have established a confraternity under the direction of Paul Fagius, and hold their conventicles on stated days, in which, as I hear, much more absurd questions are asked by the silly people than even those of the followers of Thomas or Scotus.  A new kind of confession too, or, as they call it, a preparation before the Lord’s supper, is instituted by the preachers without the consent either of the magistrates or the people.  nor is any one allowed to approach the holy communion, without having previously presented himself to the priest.  And they defend this practice solely from that passage of the holy gospel, “I know my sheep, and am known of mine.”  Therefore it is not lawful for any one to approach the Lord’s table, unless he be known to the preacher.  Marback made this assertion from the pulpit, to whom I was very nearly replying:  “ ‘And I call my sheep by name;’ therefore it is necessary to call all who come by their proper names.”  These things are very ridiculous, but really lamentable; and I have written them for no other reason, than that you may understand into what errors the church still recent and infirm is falling.  What do you think will take place a hundred years hence, if we are now blundering in open day-light?  May God preserve you and your church uncorrupted, and bestow his grace, that our English one may be established and preserved in purity!  I have enclosed for your perusal some regulations just established here, and which can be explained to you by master Butler.
  We have now with us at St. Thomas’s a Swiss preacher, who is reported either to have been expelled by you some time since, or else to have absconded, on account of adultery.  Having then become your enemy, he fled to Berne, where he endeavored to raise I know not what riot and disturbance, for which reason, it is said, he was expelled by the magistrates.  His reputation is bad enough, and hitherto has created in me no little disgust; but I think it a false report.  Should I find it to be true, I shall certainly regard the man in no other light than as a heathen and a publican, unless he become reconciled to your church, and that of Berne: nor is he a proper person to take the holy testament into his mouth, inasmuch as he despises discipline himself.  I wish for information from you upon this matter.  As to the rest, the state of the church at Strasburgh is the same as it has been since the defeat of the papists.  The magistrates have sent master Cope, who is thought to be a good man, ambassador to the emperor.  We have certain news of a peace having been agreed upon between the English, French, and Scots.  I have not yet learned the conditions; but shall hear them shortly, and will let you know.
  I wish for more information about the circumstances and condition of my kinsman John; whether he is pronounced to be qualified for your church or not.  Should he not seem to be sufficiently prepared, which I have always feared, and still do fear will be the case, a situation is offered him, by which he can obtain a respectable livelihood.  I wish therefore that an examination of him may take place, that we may know what to expect concerning him.  For if he neglects the present opportunity, and should afterwards be rejected by you, provision cannot easily be made for him in future.  He will be waited for till the next festival of St. John.  Should he not seem to you to be sufficiently qualified, I should wish to be informed of it before that day, that provision may be made for him.  There is a sufficiently creditable means of livelihood at my disposal, and one suited to his abilities; which if he now suffer to escape him, and hereafter prove troublesome to you, we shall assuredly not find it easy to provide for him in future.  I desire therefore the expression of your opinion upon this matter.  But if you are not willing to have him, let him be sent to me.  Farewell with your dear wife and children.
            Yours,
              BURCHER.
  P. S.  The letter which master Christopher Hales received from your church, he has lost together with the portmanteau.  If therefore there was any thing of importance contained in it, you can repeat it in your next.  May God preserve you!  I received the enclosed letter the day before yesterday.

LETTER CCCXII. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
June 8, 1550.
  Honor to God alone!  Much health.  Two days since, my very dear Bullinger, was brought me your letter, dated at Zurich on the 17th of May; wherein you express your satisfaction at I know not what diligence and trouble of mine in forwarding your books and letters to England, and you promise to return the obligation.  I certainly cannot allow that I have done any service that I do not owe, and a great deal more, to your kindness.  Besides, you have authority to command  me in matters of this kind.  But I enclosed the books, not the letter, for master Hooper, in some goods: the letters both to him and to the king, together with the book dedicated to his majesty, I gave in charge to a servant of master Richard.
  The word of God is daily making progress through the labor and ministry of master Hooper, and I pray our great and good God to establish what he has begun.  A friend of mine has written to me from England, that the king called Hooper to him after Easter, and wished to reward him with the bishoprick of Gloucester; but he refused it.  He was not long since summoned before the council, who urged him to accept it.  He made excuse, that he could not allow himself with a good conscience to be consecrated with the vestments and tonsure of the papacy, which is not yet abolished in the case of bishops.  They allowed the tonsure to be dispensed with, but he must put on the white linen robe when he goes to parliament.  They suppose, however, that this will be done away with by the authority of parliament.  So much respecting Hooper.  I now come to other matters.
  That jolly and impure preacher of ours will be regarded by me no otherwise than as a publican and a heathen, unless he shall be reconciled to your church and to that of Berne.
  Bucer is more than licentious on the subject of marriage.  I heard him once disputing at table upon this question, when he asserted that a divorce should be allowed for any reason, however trifling; so that he is considered, not without cause, by our bishop of Winchester as the author of the book published in defense of the Landgrave.  I am ignorant as to what the hireling Bucer, who fled from this church before the wolf came in sight, is plotting in England.  He is an invalid, and (as report says) is either becoming childish, or is almost in his dotage, which is the usual result of a wandering and inconstant mind.
  My kinsman came to me unexpectedly a month since.  I am glad to hear that he courteously took leave of you.  I have taken care to provide him with a situation.  I was angry with him for not having before bidden you farewell, and thanked you for your kindness.  But you must excuse him, both on account of his time of life, at which men are generally reserved, and also of his early education, which was rude and neglected.  There is no certain intelligence about the emperor’s coming.  It was reported that he was to set off for Brussels towards the end of May; but it is now stated that he did not depart at that time.  I sent your last letter by post to Antwerp; it will reach Hooper in less than ten days.  There is no other news, except that the papists have re-established their religion in certain appointed churches, and have many supporters.  May the Lord preserve and increase whatever true knowledge is yet remaining!  Salute most dutifully from me your wife and all our learned friends.  Farewell.
            Yours,
              BURCHER.
  P.S.  Hooper has certainly accepted a bishoprick.  For the wife of Bucer, who has come over for the purpose of taking her mother and children into England, has brought this intelligence.  The emperor is certainly marching towards Spires.

LETTER CCCXIII. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
July 10, 1550.
  Greeting.  I wrote to you, my very dear Bullinger, not long since, and together with my own letter I forwarded many others received from England and Hooper.  I sent them to Valentine Nüssbaum at Basle, that they might be more safely conveyed to you by his means: for a messenger is very rarely to be met with here, except during the fair.  I wrote you word in my letter, that our friend Hooper had been appointed to the episcopal office by the king and council of England, which is most certainly the case.  I pray God that he may well discharge this office!  Our city of Strasburgh, it is rumored, is receiving the Interim; for three churches are given up to the papists, in which they practice their errors without restraint.  The people are divided; part are in favor of popery, but the majority are in opposition to it.  Some old men and women adhere to the truth, contrary to the general expectation.  Religion still remains free, and the preachers are free.  Many persons are doubting what monstrosity the Diet of Augsburg will produce.  Every thing is quiet in England.  Religion is making due progress.  It has never been reported among us that the emperor is about to invade you; and I suspect the rumor has no other foundation than the opinion of the soldiers, who measure the emperor by their own standard.  I am rather inclined to believe that he will make war against the cities.  Should I hear any unfavorable news respecting your Switzerland, I will not fail to communicate it.  Let us meanwhile pray God to grant us peace!  Farewell, my most esteemed friend.  My family salute you and yours.
          Yours,
            BURCHER.
  P.S.  I have sent by Falckner a large packet of letters directed to master Pellican, whom I pray you to salute in my name.  Your books and letters have arrived in England long since.  I have received also a letter, which I immediately forwarded by the courier, from master Theodore, to whom I pray you to present my respects, and to inform him of the circumstance.  Once more farewell.  The bustle of the fair will not permit me to delay any longer.  Strasburgh, July 10.
  Master Gualter has written to me about some portraits procured for master Hales.  I never heard anything from him respecting them.  I will write to him, however, and if he requires it, will pay the money.  I forwarded, seventeen days since, a parcel sent by master Hooper, and a basket sent by Hales to master Gualter.  I hope you have received them.

LETTER CCCXIV. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Aug. 10, 1550.
  Greeting. I perceive, my very dear Bullinger, that you are greatly disturbed at not having received a letter from England to announce the arrival thee of your books and letters; and you seem to be no less anxious, whether the books have been intercepted, or have been lost on the way.  Dismiss all your fears, for I know for certain that the goods, in which a portion of the books was enclosed, have safely reached England.  Besides, Richard’s servant, to whom I gave in charge the letter and book for the king, came safe to his master, and has returned safe to Antwerp.  This letter of master Richard will, I doubt not, sufficiently inform you what he has done with the book and letter for his majesty.
  Hooper, I imagine, is too fully engaged to have any leisure for writing.  His last letter to me was on March 29th, and with it I received a packet for you, which I immediately took care should be forwarded to you by Valentine Nüssbaum, a citizen of Basle.  He has not written to me since.  He is certainly a bishop, and I wish he may constantly watch over the Lord’s flock.  The letter I have now received from you I will take care shall be forwarded by post, and it will reach Antwerp within eight days.  The bearer of this to you is an honest and trustworthy person, and was a servant of mine a year ago.  If you can show him any kindness, should he require it, I shall be much obliged to you.  There is no news, except that I hear the Diet of Augsburg will be prorogued to the 24th of this month.  Every thing is quiet in England.  Among us some turbulent mass-priests paraded the streets by night in arms, but were very near being beaten by the townsmen, had not the authorities made a timely appearance.  Doctor John Tischell, the patron of the papists, was wounded.  Should these mass-priests persevere in these disturbances, I hope it will turn out to the furtherance of the word of God.  They are raising their crests, as long as they perceive the emperor so industriously endeavoring the re-establishment of their errors.  May the Lord grant you his favor and peace!  Amen.
  My wife very dutifully salutes you and yours.  May you and all your family be preserved in safety!  Salute all our learned friends.  Farewell.
              Yours,
                BURCHER.
  P.S.  The Louvainists have again published their Confession of Faith.  Among other things they prohibit the people from reading the holy bible and the gospel.  A new and unheard of inquisition too is to be established through the whole of lower Germany.  Pray ye the Lord to preserve his people!  I have determined to go into England after the next Frankfort fair, on a visit to my friends, whom I have not seen for twelve years.  If I can be of any use to you there, I am entirely at your service.

LETTER CCCXV. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Sept. 1, 1550.
  Greeting.  I was exceedingly delighted, my very dear friend and master, Bullinger, at your having received a letter from Hooper, by which you were informed both respecting the books and the king’s favorable reception of them.  I shall receive the expression of your gratitude from Froschover with many thanks, and will make a suitable return whenever an opportunity shall be afforded me.  When I send letters by the post, the cost is ten kreutzer for every ounce, which is equivalent to two German loths; besides the carriage from hence to Spires, which amounts to at least a batz for each packet, with an addition of one half, if they are above the ordinary weight.  We have had no positive intelligence about the disturbances that have arisen in French Flanders.  May the Lord grant us his grace, that in whatever way Christ and his kingdom may be advanced, that of antichrist may be diminished!  I willingly undertake the office you impose upon me, of receiving the letters and books from Froschover, and of forwarding them to England.  It will be no trouble to me, but a very great pleasure; for I am anxious to do a service to you and to all Zurichers:  for I consider myself as an Anglo-Zuricher.  The books therefore and the letters I will either most carefully deliver in person, or will forward them to the individuals to whom you have addressed them.  I wonder however that you have not sent a copy to the bishop.  But it is of little consequence, for I will present him in your name with the copy which you gave me.  I have sent your letter to doctor Mont at Augsburg; for he is there with the English ambassador, though he is to return hither at the end of this month.  My business calls me away, and will not permit me to delay any longer.  I pray you, therefore, to excuse this my short letter.  We have no news; should I hear of any, I will communicate it when at Frankfort.  Farewell, with all your family.  My wife most dutifully salutes you and yours.  All our brethren are in good health.
        Yours,
          BURCHER.
  P.S.  I cannot find the book of the Louvainists, but it shall be sent from Frankfort.  Please to forward this letter to Winterthur.

LETTER CCCXVI. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Frankfort
Sept. 14, 1550.
  Greeting.  Your two letters, my dear friend, I have received with much pleasure; nor will your request occasion me any trouble whatever.  I have received the books and packets of letters from master Froschover; and I will take care with all diligence that they may be delivered to the parties for whom they are intended, and I take this charge upon myself.
  It is a false and groundless report which is circulated respecting fresh disturbances in England.  I send you the Inquisition, as they call it, put forth by the Louvainists, and written both in Dutch and German.  There is no news here worth relating.  I have read over the emperor’s proposals to the states of the empire:  he urges nothing more earnestly than that the rebels should be punished, and his religion be established.  He urges, too, the renewal of the council at Trent.  Their answer is published, but I have not yet seen it.  They say that the emperor is severely suffering from ill health.  I am glad that you have made a treaty with the confederates, and especially that you have obtained possession of the fortress.  This will certainly be of great advantage to the state.  May God enlarge your territory, and preserve you from all defilement of this present life!  Amen.
  Salute your wife and all our learned friends in my name and in that of my wife.  I will not forget to present your salutations to your friends and acquaintance in England.  Farewell.
          Yours, 
            BURCHER.

LETTER CCCXVII. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Nov. 21, 1550.
  Greeting.  I returned from England eight days since, my very dear Bullinger, where I left all our friends and acquaintance safe and well.  The state of England is such, that we can perceive the simple truth is beginning to revive there.  The word is preached in some places clearly, in others more obscurely; but both in public, during the performance of divine service in the churches, and also individually, in the hearts of many who set themselves up for gospellers, there is a snake in the grass.  There is a contest between the godly and the pretended and false brethren about the dregs of the habits and of other ceremonies; and while these things are agitated, the fold of Christ is neglected.  Some there are who have assumed to themselves too much license, both in oppressing the poor, and also as regards a manner of life altogether impure; and this under the cloke of the word of God and the gospel of Jesus Christ.  Many others have the truth at heart, and under the guidance of the word of God are really advancing to a perfect and a Christian life.  We must pray for these that they may persevere; for the others, that they may be brought to a better way of living.  Let thus much suffice respecting the general state of England:  I now come to private matters.
  The king is daily making progress, as in age, so also in the knowledge of the word of God, and in distinguished virtues.  He received with the greatest satisfaction both your letter and the book you had dedicated to him.  I gave them to Hooper, as you requested; he to some one of the household, by whom they were delivered to the king.  I doubt not but that you will receive the thanks of the king himself some time or other.  I delivered or sent all the other books and letters to the persons for whom they were intended.  I return you my lasting thanks for the book you gave me.  Hooper is sufficiently comfortable, except that he is not on good terms with the bishop of London.  Hooper claims to be inaugurated only by the imposition of hands; the bishop contends on the contrary, that he must submit to popish ceremonies, or at least to those agreeing with the popish doctrine, namely, that he must carry the bible on his shoulders, and put on a white vestment, and that thus habited and bearing the book, he is to turn himself round three times.  This controversy does no little injury to the Christian commonwealth; and the result of the tragedy is expected with some apprehension.  The papists are rejoicing at the disagreement between these chief ministers of the word of God, and are hoping that from this controversy the overthrow of the gospel will ensue.  Wherefore it would not be out of place, if both parties were reminded of their duty by yourself and the leading preachers of the truth of the present day.  Peace might possibly be the result.  Or you might more conveniently state your opinion to the king respecting profane ceremonies of this kind.  But now, letting this pass, I come to master Richard and his family.  He is alive and well, together with his wife and dear children, and desires his best salutations to his friends.  Time does not allow me to write more.  This letter of Hooper will supply what I have omitted.  Farewell.  Salute your wife from me.
            Yours,
              BURCHER.

LETTER CCCXVIII. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Dec. 28, 1550.
  Perpetual health in the Lord!  I pray for you, and for your family, and for all Switzerland every blessing of the present year: and that the word of God may abide and flourish with you, to the praise of the name of God, and the honor of Jesus Christ, and the benefit of all Christendom.  Amen.  Amen.
  Since you ask my opinion, my very dear friend Bullinger, whether I think it advisable for you to write to the king, I shall not hesitate to declare it in few words; nor do I doubt but you will receive with candor what I am about to say.  Great evil is impending over the Church of England, and I know that all worthy and godly persons are exceedingly distressed.  This evil, however, may easily be either removed or mitigated by your authority, and that of your church, if you will write to the king.  Hooper is striving to effect an entire purification of the church from the very foundation.  Other bishops, on the contrary, who nevertheless are men of learning and professors of the truth, are ashamed of this, because they will not open their eyes to their own errors.  Hence they contend with all their might to have him entangled in the same superstitious ceremonies with themselves.  They charge him with insubordination, because he positively refuses to admit any other rite of consecration than what the apostles adopted.  They first of all persuaded the king, that he condemned the vestments and things of the like kind as evil in themselves abstractedly considered: and when they could not gain their object by this means, they invented another falsehood, namely, that he had allowed the vestments, tonsure, and the like ceremonies adopted by the bishops, to be things indifferent.  But Hooper did neither the one nor the other: for he neither condemned the vestments as evil in themselves, nor would he allow that the vestments and tonsure of the bishops were matters of indifference, and endurable in the church of God.  The controversy now rests with the king to determine, who if he be clearly instructed by you as to the judgment that must be formed of it according to God’s work, I have no doubt but that it will be of great advantage to religion.  I do not, however, consider it either necessary or expedient for you to write expressly upon the matter now in dispute; but only as to what ceremonies may be allowed in the church, and to what extent; lest you might probably seem to have been suborned by Hooper to write on his behalf.  You now have my opinion, and, should you think proper to write a letter, I will forward it by a courier without any expense to yourself.  I have lately received a letter stating that the controversy is not yet ended.  Hooper has John à Lasco and a few others on his side; but against him many adversaries, among whom is Bucer; who, if he possessed as much influence now as he formerly did among us, it would have been all over with Hooper’s preferment, for he would never have been made bishop.  I fear this may still be the case, and the bishop of London is striving by all possible means that it may be so.  Master Christopher Mont has been for nearly these last six months at Augsburg, and has not yet returned.  He is daily expected.  Farewell.  My wife dutifully salutes you and yours.  Salute her also from me.
          Yours,
            BURCHER.

LETTER CCCXIX. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Jan. 6, 1551.
  Greeting.  A letter hast just been brought me from England, my very dear Bullinger, which in part announces mournful tidings, though chiefly those of a more pleasing character.  The mournful intelligence relates to the death of Paul Fagius, who departed this life not long since, that is, on the 23rd of November.  The joyful news is this, that two Christian men, namely, the bishop of Ely and the marquis of Dorset, have been chosen into the great council of England.  Richard [Hilles] and his wife are both in good health.  The leaders of the rebellion have suffered punishment.  The reports respecting the protector are all vain and false; for he has not yet been brought to execution.  Another rumor, too, had reached us, but it is a false one, concerning a renewed rebellion in England.  The messenger is waiting, and will not allow me to write more.  I sent all your letters into England.  In future, I pray you, send as few thither as you can; for they are not conveyed without great expense.  What, however, you write to Richard, I will gladly forward at my own charge.  Farewell.  Communicate this letter to the English, to whom I have not now leisure to write.
          J. BURCHER.

LETTER CCCXX. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Jan. 21, 1551.
  Greeting.  Your letter, my honored Bullinger, reached me two days since, and I forwarded to the post on that very day both the king’s letter and that for Hooper.  I most carefully gave them in charge to my singular good friend master Richard, that by his means they might be delivered to the king and to Hooper; and I well know that by reason of our ancient intimacy he will not decline this service.  I approve of the argument of your letter to the king, nor do I doubt but that it will be for the advantage both of Hooper and of religion.  The bishops have enjoined silence upon Hooper, accusing him, as my friend Thomas Knight writes me word from England, of heresy.  I forward you his letter, which can be translated into Latin by the assistance of master Butler, (to whom commend me a thousand times.)  You will thence perceive what are Satan’s plans, whom we must resist with all our power.  I request that, as you have it in your power to be of great service to our reviving church, a document may be delivered to the king by the common consent of yourself, Calvin, and other learned men, that he may be rightly instructed in this controversy.  Otherwise, as you perceive, the truth is in danger; and as you have so greatly exerted yourselves in its defense, you must not now suffer it to be destroyed in England.  I send you the news I have received respecting the war in Saxony, as it has been written to me by a friend at Cologne.  He adds in his letter, that this inscription is carried in the hand of a man arrayed in cloth of gold, represented on their standard:  “If God be for us, who can be against us?”  They carry also, on another standard, a picture of a virgin, and a serpent painted before her, whom she addresses in these words:  “Get thee away, Satan!”  How true this may be, I cannot say; but it was told me by an honorable and trustworthy man.  Should you require my assistance in any way, I am entirely at your service.  My wife earnestly salutes you and yours.  Salute her also from myself.  I wish to yourself and family, and all my friends at Zurich, a happy, quiet and peaceable new year.  May the Lord in his mercy bestow upon you and upon all kingdoms the peace of Jesus Christ!  Farewell.
            Yours,
              BURCHER.

LETTER CCCXXI. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Aug. 3, 1551.
  Health in the Lord, and a happy life!  Two days since I directed a letter which I had received from England, addressed to you, to be sent by a messenger of Constance to Valentine Nüssbaum, a merchant at Basle.  I safely received yesterday the letter that you sent by Frisius; that for Hooper I forwarded by the post.  But as letters cannot be sent backwards and forwards without some expense, you will have the kindness to take this circumstance into your consideration.  An ounce is conveyed for five kreutzers from Spires to Antwerp, exclusive of the charge of the courier from hence to Spires; which, as it may somewhat exceed the tariff, is not usually less than a batz.  Our people are so given to making money, that they are quite unmindful of the duties of liberality, and will not do anything without straightway calling out for money, money.  Wherefore they will sometimes look down with contempt upon the regulated price, and refuse to take charge of any letters unless you pay according to the covetousness of the demander.  I should be loath to trouble you with this matter, were it not that such numbers of letters are brought to me from all quarters.  I promise you my duty, fidelity, and diligence, and I will spare no exertion in looking out for a courier.  But I will afterwards make out an account of what shall have been paid, and will forward it to you by some convenient opportunity.  I know that you do not wish me to be at any loss.  As for those I have already sent, I will make you a present of the postage, and that willingly, because I know that in them you have consulted the benefit of my country and of good men.  As to those which you may forward in future, I will write upon them the weight and cost, if you wish them to be sent by post.  But if you write word for me to send them by a neighbor without any charge, they will be detained longer, but may for the most part be forwarded in the course of a month.  Therefore, if you receive letters from others to be sent by the post, receive at the same time the amount of the postage.  Thus much have I thought good to write to you respecting letters:  I now come to other matters.
  Peter Martyr has published a book on the Eucharist, to which he has annexed his disputation with our people at Oxford.  I will send you this book, if I conveniently can.  My countrymen too have been celebrating the praises of the deceased Bucer, both in verse and prose.  I wish you had seen their zeal and piety towards one however undeserving: and that you may see them, I have enclosed the book in this letter.  The death of Bucer affords England the greatest possible opportunity of concord.  The leading men of England are desirous of a successor not less learned than himself, to supply his place.  For my own part, I desire one who may be more sincere and steady.  If you know any one qualified for so important an office, pray inform me.  I make no doubt but that he could easily be advanced to this high eminence, by the help of some individuals with whom I am acquainted, and who have conversed with me upon the subject.  Whoever he may be, he will not want for friends and honor; but as truth is generally wont to have hatred for her companion, so he must expect nothing but evil from those who are evil.  Provide, if you can, for our country and our religion.  The place is open to a man of learning, if he is on our side.  The truth has prevailed.  I hear nothing certain about the Magdeburghers.  England is quiet.  A pestilence, called the sweating sickness, had been prevalent in London.  More than nine hundred died in one week; but the plague and wrath of God, by his blessing, is now abated.  May the Lord grant us his grace!  Diligently salute your wife, children, and all our learned and godly friends.
            Yours, 
              J. B.
  P. S.  A friend has written me word to-day from Cologne, that the Magdeburghers have sallied forth, and obtained a most important victory, and have taken from the enemy a great quantity of provisions of every kind.
  It is reported among us for certain, that the Magdeburghers deceived the enemy by an extraordinary stratagem on the 15th of June.  They sent out young men in women’s clothes to gather forage, and added a guard of soldiers to accompany them.  The enemy, supposing them to be really young women, made an attack upon them, as though certain of their prey.  The pretended females made a show of flight, the guard hastened to their defense.  At last the young men threw off the mask, and appeared in arms.  They attacked the enemy, and forced him to retreat.  About eight hundred of the soldiers of Maurice fell in action.  After this victory having become somewhat more elated, they again attacked the enemy, when they brought into the city three or four wagons laden with the slain bodies of the Magdeburghers.  It is reported, however, that not less than five hundred of the enemy were slain.  This statement is given by the messenger who has come hither from Magdeburgh.  Communicate this, I pray you, to my friend master Sebastian.

LETTER CCCXXII. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Aug. 10, 1551.
  Greeting.  I send you, my dear Bullinger, as I wished to do in my last letter, the disputations of Peter Martyr, and his treatise upon the eucharist.  I was unwilling to deprive you any longer of so great a pleasure.  I know not, however, whether you have received them before: should this be the case, I have nevertheless discharged my duty.  You will commend the diligence and labors of one who is most learned in every way.  He had a sharp contest with very shrewd and perverse opponents; yet he not withstanding gained the victory, which is certainly a ground of rejoicing to all good men.  Could Cambridge be similarly distinguished by one like him, how happy would our England then be!  Some of our leading men in England are desirous that Musculus should be appointed in the place [of Bucer].  But he, as I hear, rejects the terms that are offered him.  But I dare answer for it, that if he will undertake this office, he will not be less in favor with the king and with all good men than Bucer himself was.  Nor will he find the Cambridge men so perversely learned as master Peter found those at Oxford.  For the scholars of that university have been always suspected of heresy, as they call it, by the ancient members, learned and unlearned: by which you may easily judge that their studies have always been of a purer character than those at Oxford.  For from thence came forth Cox, Hooper, and (whom I ought to mention in the first place) Cranmer, and other most learned men of that class.  And there is no reason why Musculus should be so averse to this vocation; for it is more honorable to render service to a kingdom than to a city.  Wherefore, laying aside all natural misgivings, he would act, in my opinion, the part of a Christian, if, having been so often invited, he would at last consent.  Should he refuse, he will hardly escape the suspicion of cowardice and lukewarmness.  For the rest, I doubt not but that you will communicate with him upon the subject.  If he is to be persuaded, let me know; and I will take care that due provision be made for his journey, besides whatever else may be necessary.  I salute your wife and children.  Salute all our friends.  Farewell.  I acquainted you with all the news I had to communicate in my last letter sent from hence to Valentine Nüssbaum three days ago; since which nothing has taken place.  Farewell.
            Yours wholly,
              JOHN BURCHER.
  P. S.  I am most anxious to see your book, wherein you have replied to the last calumnies of Luther, together with the book of the said calumnies annexed.  Some persons have your reply, but are not in possession of Luther’s book: wherefore I wish them both joined together, that both the calumnies and errors of Luther and your answer may be seen at the same time.

LETTER CCCXXIII. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
May 1, 1553.
  Greeting.  The son of Erasmus Fabricius of pious memory has given me your most agreeable letter, my most esteemed Bullinger.  Should I have it in my power to be of use to him, or any other [of your friends], I shall never be wanting: for any one who comes hither from you will be most acceptable, even on the ground of his being a Zuricher.  I have made arrangements at Frankfort, that the letters and books for the English should be forwarded to England.  I have received your discourses on Jonah, with which my wife is much delighted.  We have long since received that little sum of money, as I lately wrote you word.  The young men did not bring the parcel to master Wolfgang of Worms, but enclosed it with other things of theirs, which will not be brought hither before our fair.  As soon as I receive them, I will safely send them you.  Master Christopher Mont is alive and well; he has been absent some time, which has occasioned his silence.  I salute him in your name, and desired him to write, which he promised he would do.
  We have some positive intelligence here, which I willingly communicate, that you may rejoice together with us.  In the room of the deceased master Hedio, we have obtained a man who is not only learned, but a disciple of the true religion, and who professes and publicly lectures in divinity.  He opposes the Lutherans, and all those who attribute to Christ’s human nature properties which belong only to his divine nature.  The Lutherans confound the two natures of Christ, if not in words, yet in reality.  He opposes them publicly, and boldly charges them with error.  I wish their eyes might be opened, lest while seeing they should become blind.
  Of the affairs of Germany and the war I hear thus much.  The princes and commissioners of the emperor and Ferdinand are to meet at Frankfort on the 16th of May to settle their disputes.  I wish this may be accomplished.  Albert, marquis of Brandenburgh, has slain some soldiers of the ecclesiastics, about four hundred, as some say, others about five hundred.  He plundered others after they had taken an oath that they would not serve either against the emperor or himself for the space of three months.  In England, by the blessing of God, all things are quiet.  Our king has now sent, for the second time, ambassadors to the emperor and the French king to put an end to the war.  I wish it were effected.  I will write to you, as soon as I know the result.  Salute your wife and dear children in my name and that of my wife.  Salute all our learned and godly friends.  Farewell.  Salute my friend Butler a thousand times, together with my dear gossip.
        Your most devoted
            JOHN BURCHER, Anglus.

LETTER CCCXXIV. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
July 8, 1553
  Greeting.  A most painful report, my dear Bullinger, has reached us, respecting our most Christian king; (for it is fitting to attribute to this real Christian the title of “most Christian,” rather than to another, who assumes that title without any pretensions to it.)  This report at first alarmed me exceedingly; and I should scarcely have believed it, had not our common friend, master Mont, who has been summoned by the English ambassadors, at the king’s command, to the emperor’s court at Brussels, confirmed it in a letter to myself.  He wrote both to me and to others on the 24th of June, that the English ambassadors had arrived at Brussels, and brought word that the king was suffering under severe illness, but by the blessing of God was so far recovered as to be out of danger.  God therefore must be praised, and entreated to preserve this our sovereign very long among us.  The whole church of England implores our great and gracious God in united prayer both for his restoration to health and long preservation.  I entreat you also to commend both our king and church to God in your continual prayers.  Mont writes word moreover, that Therouenne has been taken by stratagem: negotiations for peace were going on between the citizens and the emperor, and commissioners were sent to arrange the terms, when a cessation of hostilities took place.  Meanwhile, during their conference, the emperor’s troops made a sudden attack upon the city, and effected an entrance on that side where they had previously battered down the walls with their cannon:  they slew about five hundred soldiers, set fire to the city, and took away prisoner the son of the constable.  So that the proverb respecting the good faith of the Carthaginians may now be justly applied to that of the Spaniards.
  Thus much have I thought worth writing to you, my dear Bullinger.  Salute a thousand times in my name and that of my wife your wife, children, and all our learned friends.  Farewell.
          Yours,
            JOHN BURCHER.

LETTER CCCXXV. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Aug. 16, 1553.
  Greeting.  What I wrote in my former letter, my honored Bullinger, is daily confirmed, and more than confirmed, by the statements of some excellent men.  That monster of a man, the duke of Northumberland, has been committing a horrible and portentous crime.  A writer worthy of credit informs me, that our excellent king has been most shamefully taken off by poison.  His nails and hair fell off before his death, so that, handsome as he was, he entirely lost all his good looks.  The perpetrators of the murder were ashamed of allowing the body of the deceased king to lie in state, and be seen by the public, as is usual:  wherefore they buried him privately in a paddock adjoining the palace, and substituted in his place, to be seen by the people, a youth not very unlike him whom they had murdered.  One of the sons of the duke of Northumberland acknowledged this fact.  The duke has been apprehended with his five sons, and nearly twenty persons of rank; among whom is master Cheke, doctor Cox, and the bishop of London, with others unknown to you either by name or reputation.  It is thought that these persons gave their consent and sanction, that Jane, the wife of the duke’s son, should be proclaimed queen: should this prove to be the case, it is all over with them.  The king of France has sent word to the city of Calais and to Guisnes, for the citizens to remove, and leave the city and camp at Guisnes at his disposal, for that it was promised him by the English council.  The duke and his fellow-prisoners are supposed to have been guilty of this shameful deed.  Forces are collecting in England to defend the city and territory.  I am afraid lest your Swiss should be sent against us.  You see, my dear friend, how you are deprived of all your expectation respecting our England: you must consider therefore what you should determine upon respecting your son.  My house is open to him, and my services shall not be wanting.  Farewell, and diligently, I pray you, salute all your learned men.  I am exceedingly obliged to you all for the kindness you have shown me.
            Yours,
              BURCHER.

LETTER CCCXXVI. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
March 3, 1554.
  Greeting.  I doubt not, my esteemed Bullinger, but that the report of the rebellion of disturbed and afflicted England has already reached you; the origin, progress, and result of which the bearer of this letter will acquaint you with.  I pray you to receive him with kindness; for whatever you shall do for him, you may consider as being done for Christ.  He is a man not only learned, but pious and godly, and now an exile from England for the word of God and the testimony of Jesus Christ.  Welcome him, I pray you, to your house and hospitality; for he will only remain with you until he shall have conferred with some learned men upon some controverted points of religion.  He is quiet, and satisfied with so little, that I cannot sufficiently admire his parsimonious way of living.  But he will not live with you at your expense, for he has wherewith to provide for himself.  He has moreover given not a few proofs of his learning.  There are some learned and pious sermons published, which he preached before the late king and the nobility.  To say no more, you will learn, my Bullinger, from your own experience, what kind of a man he is:  wherefore I entreat you not to allow him to fail of obtaining your assistance.
  And now to mention a few things which you will be glad to hear.  It is stated that the rebels have put to death three hundred mass-priests.  They were successful at first, but their leader, I hear, was at length taken prisoner.  It is rumored among other things, (but the rumor is uncertain,) that the duke of Suffolk had joined the rebels, and was with them.  I wish this may prove a false report.  I have heard too, that the queen has beheaded his daughter Jane, together with her husband; that Jane, I mean, who was proclaimed queen.  But I will write you word whatever I may hear.  You must now excuse my being brief, for the bearer of this will acquaint you with all the circumstances.  Farewell.  Your son, by the blessing of God, is alive and well.
          Your know me,
            BURCHER

LETTER CCCXXVII. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Strasburgh
Sept. 3, 1554.
  Greeting.  The noble and learned Antony Cook, induced by the reputation of your country and learning, is about to pass through your city on his way to Italy.  I wish him to find that my recommendation has been of some advantage to him.  He was a fellow-laborer with [Sir John] Cheke in instructing the late king, and lived for some time with me at my house very piously and courteously.
  I have sent back to you my servant Joachim.  Do not pay him any thing for your son’s tabling, unless you can do so without any inconvenience or loss to yourself.  I will take care to provide clothes for your son as he may want them, and neither shabby nor too expensive.
  The noble bearer will be able to tell you the news from England better than I can.  The emperor has sustained a great defeat, as I wrote you word in my last letter.  The soldiers who survived the slaughter, and are daily passing disarmed through the city, bear evidence of the fact.  May the Lord provide for you all!  My wife salutes you in return.
          You know the writer,
              [BURCHER.]

LETTER CCCXXVIII. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Pinczov
Nov. 4, 1557.
  Perpetual health in Jesus Christ our Lord!  I doubt not, my dear friend and master, but that you are anxiously expecting the agreeable intelligence of my safe arrival in Poland.  By the blessing of our great and good God I reached Cracow about eight days since, happy, safe and well, and proceeded from thence to Pinczov.  I found that excellent man, and your loving friend, master John à Lasco, in good health.  He received me, by reason of your recommendation, with the greatest kindness, and has diligently pleaded my cause by letter with the Duke Palatine of Wilna.  I doubt not but that I shall obtain the license; and on this account I am to go in a few days direct to Wilna to the duke himself, and also to the king’s majesty.  I shall have for my fellow-traveler master William Barlow, formerly bishop of Bath in England, whom master à Lasco wishes to accompany me.  From Wilna I will diligently write you an account of my proceedings.
  There is no news, excepting that relating to the victory of the king of Poland over the Livonians: but it may rather be called a surrender than a victory, although they were compelled to lay down their arms.  The terms of peace are these.  The Livonians had engaged to pay the expenses of the war, namely, forty thousand pieces of gold, but the king has liberally excused them.  They are to provide a certain fixed number of cavalry for the king’s service, whenever he may require them.  The number is not ascertained, though some persons think it is four thousand.  They are to give up to the king of Poland the individuals who murdered the royal ambassadors.  Whatever they may have taken either by violence or stealth from the duchy of Lithuania, they are to restore.  So much as to the conditions of peace.
  Moreover, since I know that you are anxiously expecting the certain and avowed opinion of Melancthon respecting the humanity of Christ, I send you this, which master à Lasco has given me to copy.  It is selected and taken by word of mouth from his lectures.  And this it is which the Lutherans wished him to recant at Worms.  May the Lord give him grace plainly and openly to defend the truth!  The truth here in Poland, by the blessing of the great and good God, is deeply taking root.  Master à Lasco is boldly instructing the nobles.  He has to-day discoursed for two hours at a nobleman’s table, upon the true and genuine interpretation of the words of Christ:  “This is my body.”  He has converted many, and maintains the real, and not the Lutheran interpretation.  We must pray the Lord to give him strength.  He has just been with the prince of Cracow, who is seventy years old, whom he has brought truly to acknowledge that the pope is antichrist.  Nor does any thing make him hesitate, except the misapplication of church property, and the right understanding of the Lord’s supper.  They will easily be brought to agree, that the property of the church shall be converted to pious uses; and master à Lasco hopes that he will gradually come to the true understanding of the words of Christ.  Commend them both to the Lord in your prayers: for if he can gain him over, there is great hope of the whole of lesser Poland.  Farewell with all your family.  communicate, I pray you, what I have written to masters John Wolf, Sebastian, your sons-in-law, and the gentlemen of Poland [now at Zurich], to all of whom I desire my dutiful salutations.
            Yours, BURCHER.
  P.S.  I commend my wife to your kind protection.

LETTER CCCXXIX. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Cracow
Feb. 16, 1558.
    Greeting.  I feel assured, my esteemed friend and master, that you are anxiously expecting a letter from me, by which you may learn where I am, and how my affairs are going on.  I am endeavoring to instruct the brewers here at Cracow, of whom there are at least five hundred, in the art of brewing.  But the want of my license, which I am daily expecting from Wilna, has hitherto hindered me.  For though the king’s majesty has granted me this privilege, yet it could not receive the sign manual and be sealed with the seal of the kingdom during my stay; for on the day after the license was granted, the king went away to hunt, and does not intend to return before Lent.  It seemed, therefore, more expedient for me to go to Cracow, and there ascertain what hope there might be in that city of success in the manufacture, than to waste this whole time in idleness at Wilna.  And I find some persons here who gainsay, and think it impossible, while others are desirous of acquiring a knowledge of the art.  The delay of the license is the only impediment, but this I am expecting from day to day; for immediately after my departure the king returned to celebrate the obsequies of his deceased mother.  And I gave my business in charge to one upon whom I could depend, namely, to master John Mantzinsky, a Polish nobleman, and secretary to the duke Palatine of Wilna.  He faithfully promised to take care that, as soon as the king returned, the license should be signed with the sign manual, and sealed with the great seal.  This same Mantzinsky was studying at Zurich in the year 1547, which gave me hope of his fidelity and diligence.  He is well acquainted with master Theodore and yourself, and desires his respects to you both.  And thus much of my private affairs.
    The word of God and the gospel of Jesus Christ is by the blessing of God taking deeper root every day; and I do not hear of a single man of learning, who does not abominate the Lutheran errors.  Master John à Lasco is actively laboring in the Lord’s vineyard; and enforces no subject with greater earnestness, than the pure doctrine of the Lord’s supper.  They hold their meetings, and sacred assemblies, but in the houses of the nobles.  I have not seen any church purified [from popery], except only in Pinczov, where the word of God had its first beginning.  For that brave nobleman of Pinczov, Nicolas Olesnicki, a man certainly deserving of great praise, began the opposition to antichrist and the papists.  The duke Palatine of Wilna has sermons in his house, and baptism, and the Lord’s supper, and many of the citizens of Wilna assemble there.  He alone, among the nobles of Poland, bears the heat and burden of the Lord’s vineyard.  But he is much spoken against for patronizing the Jews, by whose bribes, they say, he suffers himself to be corrupted.  Should this be true, it will occasion not a little stumbling at the word of God.  I wish he could be admonished to consult both his own interests and the gospel of Jesus Christ.
    I have many things to write respecting the people of Poland and Lithuania, their manners and customs, which I defer till I return to you.  Thus much, however, I think right to add concerning their modes of religion.  In Poland there are Jews, papists, and gospellers.  In addition to these, there are in Lithuania Armenians, Tartars, Russians, Turks, and Muscovites.  The Tartars acknowledge a God, creator of heaven and earth, but they worship moreover the sun, moon, and stars.  The faith and religion of the Turks is well known to you.  The Armenians, Russians, and Muscovites are of the Greek church and faith.  They acknowledge as their head the patriarch of Constantinople, and are more happy than the papists in allowing communion in both kinds, and retaining the marriage of the clergy.  They perform their sacred worship too only in the old Ruthenian language.  They allow pictures, but not images, in their churches; but they place candles before them, and reverence and adore them just as the papists do.  Their churches are divided into three parts, the upper, middle, and lower.  The upper division they call, as the Jews do, the Holy of Holies, and no one enters therein save the priest and deacon.  The unmarried part of the congregation occupy the middle division, and those who are married occupy the lower, not being allowed to enter into the middle division, till they shall have been introduced by the priest.  They pray standing, and bowing down their heads to the very ground, as the monks do: they sign themselves with the sign of the cross, repeating these words, Gospodi Pomilui, which means, “Lord, have mercy upon us;” and thereupon they sign and bow themselves.  If any one laughs at their ceremonies, they immediately turn him out of the church, and sweep and clean the place where he stood.  They bury their dead with great noise and howling; they array them in new clothes and shoes, and pour on their heads two cups of wine or beer.  The corpse, moreover, receives a letter from the priests, and half a groschen from his friends; and is to present the letter and money to St. Peter, that the porter may immediately open for him the gates of heaven.  They allow of no sermon, no teaching, and adhere to their ceremonies as tenaciously as the papists.
    In Muscovy God has raised up another Luther, or rather a Zuingle.  He reproved their errors, and was arrested, and was to have been burnt for the truth’s sake, had not the great duke of Muscovy prevented it.  For when the accusation was brought before him by his bishops, he decided that the prisoner was not deserving of death, and ordered him to be released.  On his dismissal he went into Lithuania with some monks who had joined him, and there he was very kindly received by the Palatine of Wilna.  At length, on the invitation of the duke of the Ruthenians, he is promulgating the truth in that nation.  He has set forth a confession of faith in all respects agreeable to ours.  A person has promised to send it me, in which case I will either bring or send it to you.  We ought to be exceedingly thankful to Almighty God that, without any intervention of man’s teaching, he has by his holy Sprit opened, even to the Greeks, the kingdom of his Son and of the truth.  For this person is entirely unacquainted with the Latin, and every other language, in which, in our time, it has pleased God to reveal his Son.
    I have this news to communicate, that the Tartars have within these few days invaded Russia, and plundered and laid waste more than five hundred villages and hamlets.  They have carried off, as it is reported, together with an infinite quantity of plunder, thirty thousand prisoners, men, women, and children.  They retired without any loss, nor is this nation affected in the least by this event.
    On the 4th of December last, as I was journeying towards Wilna, I beheld a remarkable appearance and form of the sun.  And I was not the only one who observed it; for my companions also, namely, master William Barlow, and master George Black, the son of Francis Black, noticed it at the same time.  We left our lodging on that morning three hours before day; and as we were journeying on horseback, a great light arose, at one time towards the south, and at another time towards the west, and now towards the north, in appearance like the rising sun, and this too, out of the clouds which at that time covered the sky.  At length, the clouds were all driven away, and the sun arose in a clear and serene sky, and sent forth its beams towards the west, resembling a comet.  A yellowish pillar had appeared on each side, except that towards the sun a kind of light shone forth like that of a rainbow.  Towards the west they terminated in a pyramid.  And this appearance did not speedily vanish, but lasted steadily for three whole hours.  This circumstance certainly reminded me of the coming of the Son of God, whom I assuredly expect to appear very shortly.  May the Lord give us grace to repent and wait for him with confidence!  Farewell.
            Yours,
              BURCHER.

LETTER CCCXXX. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Cracow
March 1, 1558.
  Greeting. Some time since, my dear friend and master Bullinger, I sent you a letter from this place, to which I added others to master James Zwickius and to my wife.  If they have not yet come to hand, they may be inquired after from master John Lyner of Saint Gall; for I transmitted them to him.  But now, when I had no occasion to write, our common friend master Utenhovius arrived, and earnestly desired me to write in his stead.  For he has gone away from this place towards Prussia with master à Lasco, and was in too much haste to admit of his writing.  Peter Paul Vergerio (I wish he were really either a Peter or Paul) has laid before very many of the Polish nobility some grievous accusations respecting master à Lasco and Utenhovius.  For they are accused by him of having written to you in a very uncandid and unchristian manner respecting him and his intended mission into Poland.  And he is not satisfied with having written thus privately to the nobles, but he threatens to place the vindication of his innocence before the public: and because those holy and pious men see that great confusion is impending over the churches of Poland, they are anxious that it should be calmed and settled by the counsel, authority, and exertion of the people of Zurich.  Do you therefore use your utmost endeavors, with your usual watchfulness and circumspection, that he may give up his intended defense.  And he must not only be exhorted to give it up, but must be persuaded to remain at home, and lead the churches committed to his charge from the less pure doctrines of the Lutherans to the true and perfect acknowledgement and confession of both natures in Christ.  For it is assuredly not the part of a Christian man to quit his certain and manifest calling in search of a worldly employment, and one too which may prove injurious to sound doctrine.  God has sent him among the Lutherans, that he might convince them of their error; not that he should either consent to their errors, or introduce them into well ordered churches.  He promised the whole church that he would not introduce the Confession of Augsburg, but I hear that he is meditating a worse, with the name only changed; namely, that of the Waldenses corrupted by Luther.  Poland does not need a deputation either from him or any one like him.  The churches, by the blessing of God, are settled happily and after a Christian manner; nor do I perceive any one among us who savors of Lutheranism.  It belongs to you, therefore, to recommend the man to give up his apology and legation.  for I greatly fear that, should he not change his mind, he will gain for himself indelible disgrace and eternal condemnation.  But, forasmuch as there has been afforded him some grounds for his “apology” from the letters written to you by master Utenhovius, the latter prays and entreats you to be kind enough to order a copy of all which he wrote concerning Vergerio to be faithfully taken, and forwarded to himself: for he thinks he did not write any thing worthy of a public apology.
  My own affairs continue in the same state as heretofore.  For though there are some persons who desire to obtain a knowledge of the art of brewing, yet I am afraid of imparting it before I have received the patent.  I believe there is no other reason of its delay, except my inability to remunerate the trouble of the persons concerned.  And certainly nothing has more hindered or will hinder this affair of mine, than the circumstance of my not having wherewith to pay in fees and give in presents.  For all things are torpid in the courts of princes without a bribe; and I am afraid lest I should at last be compelled, through poverty, to return without the accomplishment of my object.  Your kindness will perhaps mention this to master James Zwickius, that he may know how impossible it is to effect a matter of so much importance with so little means.
  I commend my wife to your kindness, and pray you to continue towards her that paternal regard, with which you have hitherto honored us both, in this unfavorable juncture of our affairs.  I know she is much distressed at my long continued absence; but she will, I hope, comfort herself with the thought that every thing will turn out to the glory of God, if not to my individual benefit.  I will perform the duty of a faithful husband; let her not forget the duty of a good wife and mother of a family.
  Remind John Billinger of the promise he made to your kindness.  He has promised me fidelity; let him show fidelity to himself and to me, which will not be the case unless be abstain from drunkenness and evil company, and study to live upon a very little during his absence.  Farewell.

LETTER CCCXXXI. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
Cracow 
March 16, 1558.
    Greeting.  Within these few days, my dear friend and most esteemed master Bullinger, I wrote to you at the bidding and exhortation of our common friend, master Utenhovius, respecting a subject which, though not a pleasant one, was yet necessary and of the greatest use in preserving the peace of the rising church of Poland.
    As I have some suspicion of the honesty of the carriers, I now repeat the matter in few words.  The inveterate enemy of the cross and gospel of Christ is envious of the peace, success, and prosperity which this holy and newly-formed church has hitherto enjoyed.  He perceives his empire daily diminishing, and the assemblies of believers increasing.  And as he finds that he cannot hinder this happiness by the instrumentality of his papists, strenuously as they are exerting themselves for the kingdom of their prince, he is exciting disturbances and dissensions among those who wish to appear and be regarded as members of the same church.  Peter Paul Vergerio, a man who is in other respects well qualified to contend with the power of popery, has not conducted himself with becoming moderation in some private disputes with certain members of the church of Christ.  And taking ill the holy and paternal admonitions, which masters John à Lasco and Utenhovius desired should be greatly offered, dearest Bullinger, by yourself, he has written to this place to many of the religious nobility of Poland, bringing severe accusations against them both.  For he complains that he has been unworthily treated by the letter written to you, and gives out that he will vindicate himself by a public “apology,” which he threatens shortly to publish.  These holy men perceive the triumph that these things will occasion to their enemies, and the distress it will cause to all the pious and good; wherefore they desire them to be composed and settled by your advice and influence.  They pray you to make the man aware that he will do himself no good by the proposed apology, but that rather the peace of the church will be disturbed, and himself convicted of want of moderation.  He doubtless does not perceive the evil he is bringing upon himself.  For if the things that can be written about him should go forth, he will lose the reputation which he has hitherto enjoyed, not only with the church of Poland, but with all other churches.  And they must of necessity come forth, if he publish his apology.  And Utenhovius does not think that he wrote any thing so severe, as to call for a public defense rather than a private expostulation.  But since he has kept no copy of what he wrote, he requests you to cause whatever letters may refer to Vergerio to be faithfully transcribed, and forwarded to this place as soon as possible.  And he wishes you not only to write these things, but whatever other things may be of use against this attack, to confirm the peace of the church, and to defend his own innocence.  And to this end will serve whatever can be said respecting the ambitious views of Vergerio.  For it is believed as a fact, that he would rather by all means compass an appointment as ambassador in Poland, than be called to his present function by a voice from heaven.  And I wish he would desist both from his legation and his apology.  For I do not see what else he could effect by his legation, than what Bucer formerly introduced into Basle and Berne, namely, dissension scarcely to be effaced by much labor.  He promised the church that he would not attempt to introduce the confession of Augsburg: but he endeavors to introduce, under a changed name, instead of the Augustan confession, that of the Waldenses corrupted by Luther.  Do you prevent, as effectually as you can, these his unworthy attempts.  These are the things that masters John à Lasco and Utenhovius, and together with them the entire church of lesser Poland, ask at your hands.
    My affairs still remain in the same position.  I am eagerly expecting my patent, on the obtaining of which there will e no small hoe of some profit.  For there are both some nobles and citizens of Cracow, who brew their own beer, and who are desirous of instruction in that art.  On the other hand, there are some who make it their business to throw every obstacle in my way, and use all their endeavors to make me relinquish my pursuit.  I shall think however all my difficulties surmounted, if I obtain the patent; if not, I shall have lost my labor and my pains.  Nothing has done more injury to this business of mine, than the unreasonable parsimony of mistress ab Ulmis.  For it is certain that unless there had been a lack of presents for distribution among the clerks, I should long since have obtained both my patent, and no despicable advantage from it.  Respecting my affairs there is now some doubt, whether the seal of the kingdom of Poland can be obtained; especially as my opponents, who claim the invention of the art for themselves, have promised the chancellor five hundred florins to obtain a patent for them.  But this is my chief comfort, that the king’s majesty has long since granted me this privilege.  God grant that he may some time or other send it me confirmed with his seal.  Communicate, I pray you, these things to master James Zwickius, if he come to see you.  I commend my wife to your fidelity and protection, nor do I less commend to your kindness my kinsman, John Billinger.  Let him be admonished, I pray you, by you, both of his pledge and promise made to you when my affairs were unfortunate.  For certainly, were he not wanting in inclination, he could restore me to my former condition.  But this will never be the case, unless he give up his habit of drunkenness: for by that he consumes what might be of assistance to me, and is preparing for himself a premature death.
    I beg my remembrances to your most amiable wife, your son Henry, and your whole family.  Salute very much in my name master Peter Martyr, and all your sons-in-law.  May your state and whole church be kept in safety!  Farewell.  Dated as above.
    If you would send your letters hither with safety, you may forward them to St. Gall, to *** Von Ustadt.  For there is a citizen here, by name Hector Von Ustadt, a kinsman of Vadian.  If they are sent to him, they can always be safely forwarded either to me or to master John à Lasco.  Again farewell.
            Yours, you know who,
              JOHN BURCHER, Anglus.

  LETTER CCCXXXII. JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  Cracow 
  Oct. 27, 1558.
    Greeting.  I wrote to you, my dear friend and master Bullinger, from Vienna, both respecting the debt of your sons, and the uncandid and unchristian conduct of my relative, Christopher Rotaker, towards me.  Your sons are indebted to me a sum which I certainly should not have demanded at present, unless extreme necessity had compelled me to it.  The other, Rotaker, contrary to the duty of a Christian, not to say, of a preacher, is contriving how to retain possession of my property, which was kindly lent to him by my wife, without my knowledge and in my absence, for the relief of his wants.  Should necessity require it, repay, I entreat you, to my wife the money owing by your sons; and remind, I beg of you, my relative Christopher of his duty as a Christian and a minister.  For if he do not restore to my wife the sum that he all but fraudulently extorted from her nearly a year since, he may be assured that I shall seek to recover my property by law as soon as I return home.  I have hitherto refrained from taking any notice, lest I should turn the conversation of every body upon ourselves, and we should become the town’s-talk.  And I did this the more readily, because he himself requested it, and promised to deal honorably with me.  But when I asked for this, on my departure from home, he almost refused to give me an answer.  Let him pay the twenty florins that he owes me to my wife, from whom he extorted them, and I shall not object to wait for the payment of the debt of my kinsman John Billinger, until he has met with a sale for the bows.  Manage this affair, I pray you, with him for my sake.
    I forgot to write to you from Vienna respecting your son Christopher.  He had departed for Venice just before my arrival.  The reason of his departure was, that he could not obtain a situation in the emperor’s bakehouse.  An uncertain rumor is spread abroad here respecting the queen of Hungary, the widow of Wida, and sister of the king of Poland.  For two days since there was a general report of her having been put to death by some Hungarian noblemen, whose relatives she had beheaded for having attempted to betray her with her son Ferdinand, and deliver them into the hands of the emperor.  But it is now reported that she has betaken herself, together with her son, to a well-fortified castle, and is there besieged by the Hungarians.  The Muscovites have entered the frontiers of Livonia, and have taken five fortified places and some cities; and they are now besieging the town and port of Revel.  They had sent an embassy to the king of Poland to render them assistance.  Answer was returned, that if they would observe as fixed and inviolable the conditions of peace to which they bound themselves last year, the king was willing to deliver them from the enemy at his own expense.  The ambassadors decided upon referring this answer to their sovereign.
    A certain Julius, an Italian, who lived at Zurich, first with master Frisius, and afterwards with master Sebastian, because he could not be placed over the royal library, or sent to Paris to study (though it was in his power to obtain a frugal, Christian, and liberal education elsewhere), has returned, to his monkery as a dog to his vomit.  And the knave still adheres to his knavery, as I beheld with my own eyes.
    The queen here is suffering under a dangerous disorder, so that there hardly remains any hope of her life; she has however recovered in some small measure.  The Diet is proclaimed, according to the custom of the Poles, for Elizabeth’s day; but it will be postponed by reason of the queen’s illness.  For the king is daily expected here, who would otherwise have been at Petrikow, where the Diet was to have been held.
    The pope’s legate was received here with kindness by his own friends, and with ridicule by ours.  For as he made his entry, the trumpeter, the city watchman, sounded on his trumpet the melody, “Uphold me herein by thy word:” some of the nobles made a noise with horns, like the bellowing of herdsmen, along the way by which he entered; while others shouted in an extraordinary manner, whereby he might easily understand how acceptable his arrival was to the people of Poland.  The bishop of Cracow had cited a preacher of the gospel to appear before his tribunal.  He arrived here two days since, and, accompanied by a large attendance of nobles, came unexpectedly upon the bishop as he was sitting at his cups with the pope’s legate, and demanded of him the reason of his citation.  The bishop, astounded at the number of the nobles, replied, that he knew nothing at all about it.  The nobles then, after having warned him against molesting in any manner or summoning any of their preachers for the future, went their way.
    I gave your book to master John à Lasco, who returned you his lasting thanks, not only for the present, but because it was dedicated to the palatine of Wilna.  He is taking care that the palatine’s book shall be elegantly bound, and, should an opportunity offer, I am to present it; if not, I shall send it; for the place where he is now staying is forty miles distant from hence.  I have found out master Lælius, to whom I gave your letter.  Farewell, and salute your family and all your learned friends respectfully in my name.
                Yours,
                  BURCHER, Anglus.
    P.S.  There is not much hope of my making any profit here by this trade of mine.  For my license is not sealed with the Polish, but with the Lithuanian seal, which is only valid in Lithuania.

  LETTER CCCXXXIII.JOHN BURCHER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  Cracow 
  Nov. 30, 1558.
    Greeting.  After I had finished and sealed my last letter, I received the letters of masters à Lasco and Utenhovius, in which they desire to apologize for not having written individually to all the ministers at Zurich.  For the want of time was an hinderance to them both, and to one of them, in addition to want of time, a very unfavorable state of health; for master à Lasco, who has been almost always under severe suffering from his usual disorder during the whole time of my being here, has for these eight days past been much more grievously and dangerously attacked.  Let him therefore be commended to our good and gracious God in the prayers of the church at large.
    They have in their letters imposed upon me this office, that I should entreat all the ministers of our church to send an united letter to the king’s majesty, to admonish him touching both his kingly duty and his religion.  They think it expedient too, that other princes should be admonished (for instance, the lord palatine of Wilna and the lord of Cracow) to persevere with diligence in what they have begun.  They think that if the nobles of Christendom can be stirred up to this by a general letter, no slight benefit will ensue.  Do you act as it becomes Christians.  For the time is certainly arrived, in which the kingdom and truth of Christ can be advanced, if our indifference or cowardice do not prevent us from advancing where the hasty and shameless audacity of our adversaries has impelled them to rush headlong.  The king is of an easy and tractable disposition, and many without difficulty be brought over to our opinions.  Of this indeed he gave, not long since, an instance by no means to be overlooked, in that he could not be prevailed upon by the bishops to banish the gospellers to another place during the time of the Diet.  I beg, entreat, and implore you by Christ, and by the salvation of your souls, not to neglect this opportunity.  Master John Gualter ab Ulmis can forward your letters to this place with speed and safety.  It would, moreover, tend to the advancement of the gospel, if you would make honorable mention of masters John à Lasco and Utenhovius both to the king and princes; nor should they be forgotten in writing to the nobility.  And if it be allowed to mix secular concerns with things so sacred, I could wish that I myself and my affairs should at least be recommended to the princes and the nobility.  Farewell in Christ our only Savior!  In haste, as above,
            Your most devoted,
                JOHN BURCHER, Anglus.

  LETTER CCCXXXIV. JOHN CALVIN TO LADY ANNE SAYMOUR.
  Geneva
  July 15, 1549.
    As the most illustrious princess, your mother, has lately presented me with a ring as a token of her good-will, and this too uncalled for by any desert of mine, it would be very unbecoming in me to refrain from some expression of gratitude, that may at least bear testimony of my respect.  But again, when language is wanting to enable me to discharge the duty that I owe her, nothing appears to me more becoming than that I should invite you to my assistance, most noble lady, and who are not less distinguished by your virtue than by your birth.  For as you will be, beyond all others, a suitable interpreter to your mother, you will also according to your exceeding kindness readily perform this office; and the rather, because, unless I am mistaken, you are persuaded that it will not be disagreeable to her: for I understand that you have been made aware, from her conversation, of he friendly disposition towards me.  Wherefore, if my request has also any influence with you, I would earnestly entreat you to condescend to offer her my humble salutation, with all reverence; so at least as she may understand that the present, with which she honored me, was not bestowed upon an ungrateful person.  Moreover, I dare venture to use more freedom with you, because I have been informed that you are not only adorned with a liberal education, (which is very unusual in a lady of such birth and station,) but that you are so conversant also in the doctrine of Christ, as to afford an easy access to his ministers, in the number of whom, if I am not mistaken, you acknowledge myself.  It remains for me to exhort you to persevere in so happy a course.  For although, as I understand, you have entered it of your own accord, (and I hope the Lord, who has given you this inclination, will give you also constancy to persevere even unto the end;) yet forasmuch as, in the midst of so many obstacles and hinderances from the world, and likewise in so great infirmity of our flesh, incentives are never superfluous, you will take my exhortation in good part.  Certainly, among so many excellent gifts, with which the Lord has seen sit to endue and accomplish you, this is by far the most important, that he has held out his hands to you from your tender youth, that he might lead you to his Son, the author of eternal salvation, and the source of all good: wherefore it becomes you to endeavor with the greater zeal to follow with alacrity him who calls you, especially when he has at the same time afforded you aids, which we often perceive not only the daughters of princes, but princes themselves, to stand in need of.  Salute for me your brother, a youth of noble disposition, and the ladies your sisters.  May the Lord daily enrich you all with his blessing, and manifest himself to you as your constant guide through the whole course of your life!  Farewell, most excellent and honored lady.  Geneva.  July 15, 1549.
            Your true and most obedient servant,
                JOHN CALVIN.

  LETTER CCCXXXV. JOHN CALVIN TO THE LORD PROTECTOR OF ENGLAND.
  unknown
  unknown
    My Lord, that I have so long delayed to write to you has not arisen from want of inclination; but I have abstained from doing so to my great regret, from the fear that, during the late troubles, my letter might have occasioned you some new annoyance.  I now thank my God that he has afforded me the opportunity which I have hitherto been waiting for.  And I am not the only one who rejoices in the happy issue which God has given you out of your affliction, but likewise all true believers, who desire the advancement of the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ; inasmuch as they know the pains and trouble you have taken that the gospel might be restored in all its integrity, and that all superstitions might be overthrown; and are nothing doubting but that you are ready to do the like for the time to come, according as you may have the means.
    As to yourself, my lord, you have not only to acknowledge the goodness of God in stretching forth his hand for your deliverance, but you must also keep his visitation in remembrance, that you may turn it to your profit.  I am aware of the regret you may feel, and how you may be tempted to make a like return to those whom you consider to have sought to do you a greater mischief than has happened to you; but you know the remonstrance of St. Paul upon this, namely, that we have not to fight against flesh and blood, but against the hidden devices of our spiritual enemy.  Let us not therefore wait trifling with men, but rather turn our attention to Satan, to resist all his machinations against us.  And as there is no doubt but that he has been the author of the mischief that has been devised against you, to the end that by this means the progress of the gospel might be hindered, and every thing, in fact, be thrown into confusion; so, my lord, by forgetting and pardoning the wrongs of those whom you may consider to have been your enemies, apply all your endeavors to repel the malice of him who has made use of them, by loving them even when they have sought your destruction.  This nobleness of mind will not only be acceptable to God, but will render you more amiable before men.  I have no doubt but that you will give this subject due consideration: but if your kindness extends so far, so much the more ought I to feel confidence that you will favorably receive what I am now saying upon it, as knowing that I have no other motive for giving you such exhortations, except the regard that I entertain for your welfare and honor.  And indeed it is so difficult a virtue to overcome one’s passions, so as to return good for evil, that we cannot be too much exhorted to that effect, even when the Lord has ordered the matter better than many persons supposed.
    You must bear in mind, my lord, the example of Joseph.  It would be difficult to find, in the present day, such a mirror of integrity: nevertheless, perceiving that God had turned to his good all the evil that they had devised against him, he resolved to show himself a minister of the goodness of God towards his brethren who had persecuted him.  This triumph will be more excellent than that which God has afforded you already, when he preserved and protected both your person, your property, and your honor.  Nevertheless, my lord, you have also to consider, that if God has thought fit to humble you for a little time, he has not done so without cause: for however unblameable you may have been with regard to men, you know that before this great heavenly Judge there is no one who does not find himself guilty.  See how the saints have regarded the chastisements of God, bending the neck, and bowing the head under the correction.  David had walked very uprightly, yet he nevertheless acknowledges that it was good for him to have been humbled by the hand of God.  As soon therefore as we perceive ourselves to be chastened in any way soever, it is good for us to enter into ourselves, and thoroughly examine our life, to discover the sins that were concealed from us: for whenever too great prosperity dazzles our eyes, so that we do not perceive why God is correcting us, there is surely reason to pay him at least as much respect as we should to a physician; for it belongs to him to discover our inward evils that were unknown to ourselves, and proceed to their cure, not according to our wishes, but according as he knows and judges what is proper.  What is more, he must sometimes make use of a preservative remedy, not waiting till we are already fallen into disease, but previously providing against it.  God, having placed you in a position of high dignity beyond your ordinary rank, has done great things for you, and which will possibly be more estimated after your death, than they are now valued in your life-time; and above all, he has caused his name to be magnified by you.  Now the most virtuous and excellent characters are in greater danger than any other persons, of being tempted to forget themselves.  You know, my lord, what is recorded of the holy king Hezekiah, that after having performed such memorable actions, as well for religion and the service of God, as for the common advantage of his country, his heart was lifted up.  If God has chosen to prevent this in your case, it is an especial favor that he has done you, even if he had no other motive for it than that he might be glorified in your deliverance, and that he might be known both by yourself, and by all mankind in your person, as the true protector of his people.  That alone ought to suffice you.
    It remains, my lord, that since he has given you the upper hand of your enemies, you return him such homage for this blessing, as is justly due to him.  If we are recovered from a dangerous disorder, we ought to be doubly careful to bless and glorify our gracious God, just as if he had granted us a second life.  You ought not to do less in the present case; your zeal in exalting the name of God, and in restoring the purity of his gospel, has already been great; but you know, my lord, that in a matter so important, when we have done all in our power, we shall still have fallen short, by a great deal, of all it requires.  However, if God, in binding you anew to himself, has intended by these means to encourage you to perform your duty better than you have ever done before, and to take pains and apply all your endeavors to the advancement of the holy work that he has begun by you, I no longer doubt but that you will perform it; but I am also confident that, knowing the kind feeling by which I am induced to exhort you, you will receive it with kindness, as you have been wont to do.  When the honor of God has thus recommended this proceeding to you, above all it is certain that he will watch over you, and over all your family, to diffuse therein his graces more abundantly; and he will make you feel the value of his blessing, for this promise will never fail us, “Them that honor me I will honor,” [1 Sam. ii. 30].  True it is, that those who do their duty best, are oftentimes the most molested by many attacks; but it is enough for them that God is with them for their deliverance.  But greatly as it is for your interest to look up to God, and to be contented with rendering him your willing service; it is nevertheless, my lord, a great consolation to you to see the king so favorably disposed as to prefer the restoration of the church and of pure doctrine to every thing else; as it is an admirable virtue in him, that at such an early age the vanities of this world do not hinder the fear of God and the true religion from ruling in his heart: as it is too an especial blessing for his kingdom, so likewise should it be a great comfort and satisfaction to you, that you are doing him the chief service which he desires and demands of the heavenly King, the Son of God.  Having, my lord, most humbly commended myself to your good grace, I implore our gracious God, that having you in his holy keeping, me may increase in you more and more the gifts of his Holy Spirit, and make them serve to his glory, so that we may have every reason to rejoice.

  LETTER CCCXXXVI. JOHN CALVIN TO KING EDWARD VI.
  Geneva
  Jan. 1, 1551
    Sire.  If I had to make excuse to your majesty for the liberty I have taken in dedicating to you these books which I herewith present to you, I must have found an apologist to address you on my behalf.  For my letters would be so far from possessing any influence for this purpose, that they would have required a new apology for themselves.  In fact, as I should never have taken upon myself to address to you the commentaries which I have published in your name, so I should not presume to write to you now, were it not for the confidence I have already entertained that both my letter and commentaries would be favorably received.  For since, regarding me as of the number of those who exert themselves in advancing the kingdom of the Son of God, you have not disdained to read what I had not expressly dedicated to your majesty; I have thought that if in serving Jesus Christ, my master, I should equally bear testimony to the especial reverence and affection that I bear you, I could not fail to meet with a favorable and courteous reception.
    What is more, sire! as I feel assured that my letters will be received by you as I desire, I shall make no difficulty in praying and exhorting you in the name of him to whom you yield all authority and power, to take courage in the pursuit of what you have so well and happily begun, as well in your own person, as in the state of your realm.  It is that the whole may be consecrated to God, and to our good Savior, who has so dearly bought us.  For with respect to the general reformation, it is not yet so well established, as not to make it desirable to carry it still farther; and in fact it would be very difficult to cleanse at once so great a sink of superstition as we find in the papacy.  Its root is too deep, and has long since extended too far, to come to the end of it so soon.  But difficult or tedious as it may be, such is the excellence of the work, that one is never weary of the pursuit.  I doubt not, sire, but that Satan is placing many hinderances in the way, to retard and cool your zeal.  A great portion of your subjects are not aware of the good you are procuring them.  The great, who are elevated in point of rank, are oftentimes too apt to consider the world, without any regard to God.  And they daily raise up to themselves new combats which they never before thought of.  Now I have good hope, sire, that God has endued you with such magnanimity and firmness, that, notwithstanding all this, you will not be wearied or enfeebled.  But the thing is in itself of such extreme importance, that it well deserves the exertion of all human power to accomplish it.  And even when one shall have come to the end of it, there will yet remain some work to be done.
    We see that in the time of good king Josiah, who had the especial testimony of the Holy Spirit, that he had performed every duty of an excellent prince, in faith, zeal, and all holiness, nevertheless the prophet Zephaniah shows that there still remained some remnants of former superstitions even in the city of Jerusalem.  Thus, sire, though you are most laboriously engaged with your council, you will never be able entirely to eradicate all the evil which so well deserves to be corrected.  But this ought to be a great motive to animate and encourage you, and even if you cannot effect all that would be desirable, it is a very abundant consolation, when you see that the exertion made by this good king is a service well-pleasing to God; in such wise that the Holy Sprit magnifies the reformation effected by him, as if there had been nothing left to blame in it.  Only then, sire, aim at the mark which is set before you in the example of this holy king, so that it may be testified of you that you have not only destroyed impieties which were repugnant to the honor and service of God, but also that you have abolished and raised to the foundations every thing that tends only to the nourishment of superstition.  For when God wishes to commend to the utmost those faithful princes who have restored and re-established the purity of his service, he especially adds, that they also brake down the high places, that the memory of the idolatrous worship might be destroyed.
    It is true, sire, that there are certain things indifferent which we may lawfully bear with.  But we must always observe this rule, that there must be sobriety and moderation in ceremonies, so that the light of the gospel be not obscured, as though we were still under the shadows of the law: and then, that there be nothing inconsistent with, and unconformable to, the order established by the Son of God, and that the whole may tend and conduce to the edification of the church.  For God does not allow any one to sport with his name, mingling frivolities among his holy and sacred ordinances.  Now there are manifest abuses which are not to be endured; as, for instance, prayer for the dead, placing before God in our prayers the intercession of saints, and adding their names to his in taking an oath.  I doubt not, sire, but that you have been informed of these things: I implore you in the name of God to persevere, so that every thing may be restored to its proper integrity.
    There is another point, sire, which ought to be especially regarded by you, namely, that the poor flocks be not destitute of pastors.  Ignorance and barbarism have pressed so heavily in this accursed papacy, that it is not easy to obtain, at the first attempt, persons fit and qualified to discharge that office.  However, the thing is well worth taking pains about; and let your ministers, sire, keep their eye upon it, that the food of life may be afforded to the people, as it ought to be.  Without that, all the holy and good ordinances you can make will avail but little to reform their hearts in good earnest.
    In fine, forasmuch as schools are the seedplots of future pastors, it is quite necessary to keep them pure and unmixed with any weeds.  I say this, sire, because in your universities, as they tell me, there are many young persons supported by exhibitions, who, instead of affording good hopes of being of service to the church, rather show symptoms of a desire to injure and overthrow it, not concealing the fact of their being opposed to the true religion.  Wherefore, sire, I again implore you in the name of God, that you be pleased to give some order upon this subject, so that the property which ought to be as it were sacred, be not converted to a profane use, and to the nourishment of venomous beasts, whose only desire it is to poison every thing for the future.  For by these means the gospel will always be driven back by the schools, which ought to be as it were the pillars of it.
    Meanwhile, sire, all right-minded persons praise God, and feel themselves greatly obliged to you, for having graciously been pleased to grant churches to your subjects who speak the French and German languages, as far as respects the use of the sacraments and spiritual discipline.  I hope that the license you have been pleased to afford them will have its effect.  Nevertheless, sire, I cannot refrain from again entreating you, knowing as I do how necessary it is, not only for the peace and satisfaction of the well-disposed, who desire to serve God and to live peaceably in obedience to you, but also to keep in order vagabond and dissolute persons, if they have retired into you realm.
    I am well aware, sire, that you have at your command persons of the most accurate information, who can inform you of these things by word of mouth far better than I can by writing; and also that in your council you have persons endued with wisdom and zeal to advance whatever may be expedient.  I doubt not but that, among others, the duke of Somerset will exert himself in the advancement of what he has been faithfully employed upon till now.  But I believe, sire, that all this will not hinder you from receiving with kindness whatever you know to have proceeded from the same source.
    In fine, sire, while I am fearful of having already wearied you by my excessive prolixity, I pray you that, in this respect as well as others, you will be pleased to excuse and to pardon me of your gracious kindness, to which I most humbly supplicate to be commended, having implored our good God and Father to maintain you in his holy protection, to defend you by his Sprit, and to cause his name to be glorified by you more and more.  From Geneva this [Jan. 1, 1551.]

  LETTER CCCXXXVII. JOHN CALVIN TO ARCHBISHOP CRANMER.
  Geneva
  April, 1552
    Most illustrious lord, you truly and wisely judge that in the present disturbed state of the church no more suitable remedy can be adopted than the assembling together of godly and discreet men, well disciplined in the school of Christ, who shall openly profess their agreement in the doctrines of religion.  For we see by what various devices Satan is endeavoring to abolish the light of the gospel, which, having arisen upon us through the wonderful goodness of God, is shining forth in every quarter.  The hireling dogs of the pope are barking unceasingly, that the pure word of Christ may not be heard.  Impiety is every where boiling forth, and raging with such licentiousness, that religion is little better than an open mockery.  Those who are not avowedly hostile to the truth indulge themselves nevertheless in a wantonness which, unless it be checked, will occasion to us sad confusion.  Nor does this disease of foolish curiosity and intemperate audacity prevail only among the common people; but, what is more disgraceful, it is becoming too rife even among the order of the clergy.  It is too well known by what reveries Osiander is deceiving himself, and fascinating certain other persons.  The Lord, indeed, as he has been wont to do from the beginning of the world, is able wonderfully, and by means unknown to us, to preserve the truth from being rent in pieces by the dissensions of man.  Nevertheless he would by no means have those persons inactive, whom he himself has placed on the watch; since he has appointed them his ministers, by whose aid he may purify sound doctrine in the church from all corruption, and transmit it entire to posterity.  For yourself, most accomplished prelate, it is especially necessary, in proportion to your more exalted position, to bestow all your attention upon these matters, as you do.  And I do not say this, as though I considered it needful to spur you on afresh, who are not only outrunning us of your own free will, but are also of your own accord urgent in exhorting others; but that I may encourage you by my congratulations in so happy and excellent a course of action.
      We hear indeed that the gospel is making favorable progress in England.  But I doubt not that you find it there also to be the case, what Paul experienced in his time, that when a door is opened to receive pure doctrine, there forthwith arise many adversaries.  But though I am aware of the number of champions you have at hand well qualified to confute the lies of Satan, yet such is the wickedness of those parties whose great business it is to create confusion, that the diligence of good men in this respect can never be deemed either excessive or superfluous.  I know too, in the next place, that your care is not confined to England alone, but that you are at the same time regardful of the world at large.  Than not only is to be admired the generous disposition of the most serene king, but also his rare piety in honoring with his favor the godly design of holding an assembly of this kind, and in offering a place of meeting within his realm.  and I wish it could be effected, that grave and learned men from the principal churches might meet together at a place appointed, and, after diligent consideration of each article of faith, hand down to posterity a definite form of doctrine according to their united opinion.  But this also is to be reckoned among the greatest evils of our time, that the churches are so estranged from each other, that scarcely the common intercourse of society has place among them; much less that holy communion of the members of Christ, which all persons profess with their lips, though few sincerely honor it in their practice.  But if the teachers conduct themselves with more coldness than they ought to do, the chief blame rests with sovereigns themselves, who either from being entangled in secular matters disregard the welfare of the church and all godliness; or, satisfied each of them with his own individual tranquility, are not touched by any feeling of concern for others.  Thus it is that, the members being scattered, the body of the church lies torn to pieces.
    As far as I am concerned, if I can be of any service, I shall not shrink from crossing ten seas, if need be, for that object.  If the rendering a helping hand to the kingdom of England were the only point at issue, that of itself would be a sufficient motive to me.  But now, when the object sought after is an agreement of learned men, gravely considered and well framed according to the standard of scripture, by which churches that would otherwise be far separated from each other may be made to unite; I do not consider it right for me to shrink from any labors or difficulties.  But I hope my want of ability will occasion me to be excused.  I shall have sufficiently performed my duty, if I follow up with my prayers what shall be undertaken by others.  Master Philip [Melancthon] is too far off for letters to go backwards and forwards in a short time.  Master Bullinger has probably replied to you already.  I wish my efficiency corresponded to the ardor of my inclinations.  However, what I declined to do at the beginning, the very difficulty of the case, of which you are sensible, compels me to attempt; that is, not to exhort you only, but implore you to persevere, until at least something be effected, if all things do not turn out according to your wish.  Farewell, most accomplished and sincerely revered prelate.  May the Lord continue to guide you by his Spirit, and give his blessing to your holy endeavors!  Geneva.

  LETTER CCCXXXVIII. JOHN CALVIN TO KING EDWARD VI.
  Geneva
  July 4, 1552
    Sire.  Much as I ought to fear being troublesome to your majesty, and for this reason abstain from writing to you more frequently, I have nevertheless taken the liberty to send you a short exposition that I have made upon the 87th Psalm, in the hope that you would be pleased with it, and that the perusal may be very profitable to you.  As I was expounding it one day in a sermon, the argument appeared to me so suitable to you, that I was immediately induced to write out the whole, such as you will see it, when it shall please your majesty to devote a single hour of your time to that purpose.  It is true that I treat the subject in general terms, without a personal address to yourself, but I have only had reference to you in writing it; and in effect, in appropriating it, as your prudence may dictate, to your own use, you will find it to contain a lesson and a doctrine very profitable to your majesty.
    You well know, sire, what danger there is to kings and princes, lest the height to which they are elevated should dazzle their eyes, and amuse them here below, causing them to forget the kingdom of heaven; and I doubt not but that God has warned you of this danger that he might preserve you from it, and that you will guard against it a hundred times better than those who experience it without being aware of it.  Now in the Psalm before us is set forth the grandeur and dignity of the church, which ought in such wise to draw over to itself both great and small, that all the riches and honors of the world cannot hold them back, nor keep them from aiming at this object, namely, to be enrolled among the people of God.  It is a great thing to be a king, especially of such a country; yet I have no doubt but that you esteem it incomparably better to be a Christian.  It is therefore an inestimable privilege that God has made you, sire, a Christian king, to the end that you may act as his vicegerent in maintaining the kingdom of Jesus Christ in England.  You see then, that in acknowledging this especial benefit, which you have received from his infinite goodness, you ought to be very zealous in employing all your powers to his honor and service, affording an example to your subjects to do homage to this great King to whom your majesty is not ashamed to subject yourself in all humility and reverence under the spiritual sceptre of his gospel.  If you have hitherto so acted that we have wherewith to glorify God on your behalf, this psalm will serve at all times for your encouragement and support.  Meanwhile, sire, I entreat you that this brief writing may serve me as a protestation and testimony to your majesty of the great desire I have to employ myself in doing more, when the means shall be afforded me.
    Sire, after having most humbly commended myself to your grace, I implore our good God to fill you with the gifts of his Holy Spirit, to guide you in all wisdom and virtue, and to make you flourish and prosper to the glory of his name.  Geneva, July 4, 1552.
              JOHN CALVIN.

  LETTER CCCXXXIX. JOHN CALVIN TO LORD JOHN GREY.
  Geneva
  Nov. 13, 1554
    Though it cannot be, most noble sir, but that the misfortunes of your house, so distressing and deplored by all good men, must have inflicted a doubly severe would upon yourself, and must even now occasion you the most lively sorrow; I am nevertheless assured that, as is befitting a Christian man, you have always stood firm and unmoved, and still continue to do so, under this excessive weight of trials.  For though we sometimes perceive that godly minds, through the infirmity of the flesh, are grievously shaken even by lesser calamities, yet the faith that reposes upon Christ can never be entirely overthrown.  Wherefore, I have no doubt but that when you were carried away in that stormy tempest, you had your anchor fixed in heaven, and that you bravely endured, and firmly sustained, the fury of those waves which might otherwise have overwhelmed you a hundred times.  But something of more importance yet remains, that you should carry on the warfare of the cross even unto the end.  For the Lord has not exercised you with such severe conflicts for a short time only, that you may afford an example of an exalted mind; but also that after his calamity, by which the greatness and splendor of your fortune is come to nought, you might pursue the remainder of your course with a calm and equable placidity of spirit.  Moreover, he has designed also to bring you to the practice of that rule which Paul prescribes to us by his own example, that you may learn how to bear a lowly condition no less than a high one: and in proportion as this virtue is more difficult and seldom to be met with, if you make an advance in it, the loss occasioned by this shipwreck will be compensated in no small degree.
    But though I congratulate the most illustrious duke your brother, and your excellent niece, a lady whose example is worthy of everlasting remembrance, to both of whom it was given, even in death itself, to commit their triumphant souls into the hands and faithful keeping of God; yet in the midst of so many most distressing tidings it has always afforded me no common comfort, to have heard that you have been snatched from the very jaws of death, and are still preserved to us in safety.  The anxiety I had felt owing to the false report of your death, was first relieved a short time since by Immanuel Tremellius and his son-in-law Antony; who, while speaking in commendation of your liberality and numerous offices of kindness towards them, added, that in the ruin of this most noble family they had great reason to deplore their own loss as individuals.  They complained among other things, that on the first bursting forth of this storm they were deprived of those means whereby they had hoped to derive some alleviation of their poverty in their exile.  Now, since you are restored, they implore that kindness from you which they have in so many ways experienced, if there be any hope and any possibility of recovering that means of support which they so greatly stand in need of.  And though the recommendation of their learning and godliness will abundantly suffice without any request of mine, yet having full reliance on your favorable disposition towards me, I did not think I ought to refuse them this service, and I have no doubt but that you will easily pardon my boldness.  Farewell,  most noble and illustrious sir, and my most honored master.  May God, the Father of Jesus Christ and our, defend you with his protection, guide you by his Sprit, sustain you by his strength, and enrich you with all heavenly benediction!  Geneva, Nov. 13, 1554.
            Yours,
              JOHN CALVIN.

  LETTER CCCXL. THE PROVOST AND COUNCIL OF BERNE TO KING EDWARD VI.
  Berne
  Dec. 14, 1549
    Greeting.  Your ambassador, master Christopher Mont, had delivered to us your royal majesty’s letter, from which, and also from what he afterwards told us, we perceive the exceeding kindness and benevolence and sincere friendship of your majesty towards us; for all which we offer abundant thanks to your majesty, with the assurance that when time and opportunity shall require, we shall be most ready to return the obligation in like manner.  But that your majesty may be acquainted with our feelings and intentions respecting these matters, the friendly regard towards us of your most serene father of happy memory, as well as that of your majesty, has been, as it ever will be, most gratifying to us; and if we have rendered to your majesties any duties and services, they have proceeded from a willing mind.  It shall therefore be our duty, in which we desire to be most forward, to devote our care and attention to all the affairs and concerns of your majesty, (especially for the sake of the bond of the Christian religion,) and to render you our grateful service, benevolence, and friendship.  With respect to a future council, we doubt not but that your majesty has perceived long since the state in which the affairs of Christianity and evangelical religion continue among us and in our churches, since the public disputation that was held here; in which state, by God’s blessing, we have finally purposed and determined to continue.  Nevertheless, should it happen that a general or a national council be appointed, and held in the Sprit of the Lord, to which a safe and free conduct shall be granted to all persons, both in going and returning, and in which the sacred scriptures of the old and new testament shall alone have place, and be regarded as the standard; we shall not, as becomes Christians, refuse to comply with this, and doubt not but that other Christians will do likewise.  Wherefore we do not think that there is any necessity, or that it is worth while to introduce other consultations, considerations, or bonds; earnestly entreating your majesty to commend us to you, and to be pleased to take these things in good part.  And may your majesty happily live in a peaceable, prosperous, and lengthened government of your most flourishing kingdoms, and in the propagation and defense of the Christian faith!  Dated Dec. 15, 1549.

  LETTER CCCXLI. CHRISTOPHER FROSCHOVER TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  Oxford
  Nov. 19, 1559
    Greeting.  Grace and peace from our Lord Jesus Christ!  I have been long in doubt, most reverend lord and father, and my mind has been almost distracted by various cogitations, namely, by pondering with myself whether I ought to undertake so great a charge as to address your dignity with my unpolished letter.  At length, when I saw our countrymen John ab Ulmis and John Rodolph Stumphius frequently writing to you, and understood that their letters were kindly received by you, I was then induced to send you that brief epistle.  And truly but for this reason, and that your exceeding courtesy had encouraged me, and your beneficence invited me, I should have kept my hand from my pen.  I have, however, a good hope that you will receive my letters with the like kindness.  Nevertheless, I must deprecate the charge of presumption in one so insignificant as I am, writing to so distinguished an individual as yourself.  But as I have nothing very suitable to write about, I will briefly acquaint you with my present condition.
    As soon as I left Zurich, I went to the Hesse family at Marpurg, where I remained half a year, and so much the more gladly, when I perceived that Philip Fallenberg, who derived no small advantage from your commendation of him, was coming down to me.  Afterwards, however, when that Burcher, who is trading at Strasburgh, had determined upon a journey to England, I was sent thither with him, and am now staying in the university of Oxford with our townsmen, namely, John ab Ulmis and John Rodolph Stumphius, the latter of whom I have joined in his lodging, and partly in his studies.  I have now, I think, said enough upon this subject; for I doubt not but that you have long since heard the circumstance from my uncle.  And that I may not keep you from your occupations longer than is becoming, and that you may not become weary of attending to me, I will adopt a Laconic conciseness, and tell you in one word what I wish.  I beg therefore, and entreat you, that when you write to master Peter Martyr, you will in the course of your letter thank him in my name for having so courteously noticed me, and promised me all his influence and assistance; and you may add a commendation of me, by which he may be confirmed in his favorable opinion.  I request you therefore, again and again, to condescend to do me this service, and by no means to suffer your patronage to be wanting.  Should I obtain from you this kindness, I shall be more closely bound and united to you, and most ready to do you every service in my power.  Meanwhile, however, I must ask your forgiveness for the freedom of my request.
    What is now doing here, and what has been done, you will more easily learn from the letters of others, for at the time of my writing this I have scarcely been a month in England; for which reason I have possessed neither the opportunity nor the ability of acquiring much information.  You must however consider what I have written, whether you approve it or not, as proceeding from the best feeling, and from a mind entirely devoted to your service; and should you, in fine, meet with any thing in my letters which offends your dignity, you must impute and ascribe it to my youth, and with your usual kindness and good sense bestow your forgiveness.  Should I learn that this present letter is acceptable to you, you shall have, by God’s blessing, a better and a more correct one in future.  You may read this when you are at leisure from more important engagements.  Salute your sons individually in my name.  Farewell, and may the Lord Christ long preserve your dignity in safety, to the restoration of true godliness, and the advancement of good learning!  Dated at Oxford, Nov. 19, 1550.
            Your most respectful and attached,
                CHRISTOPHER FROSCHOVER.

  LETTER CCCXLII. CHRISTOPHER FROSCHOVER TO RODOLPH GUALTER.
  Oxford
  Feb. 21, 1551.
    Greeting.  Whereas, most dear and honored master, I am beforehand in interrupting and disturbing by my trifling letters you and your sacred occupations and fruitful studies, in which I know you to be engaged, to the great advancement of useful learning; you must not impute it to my boldness, but to your courtesy which is every where spoken of, and which, together with your abundant benefits and my consciousness of the service I owe you, has suggested to one of the meanest of mankind this confidence, namely, that you shall not seem to have bestowed your favors upon an ungrateful and thankless person.  For though my destinies may rage against me, and render me most miserable, they never shall or can make me ungrateful.  But as I had nothing of importance, and as nothing occurred worthy or fitting to write to you about, I thought it would be best for me to give you an account of my studies.  Be assured therefore that I have directed all my labor and diligence to the learning of languages, Greek and Latin for instance, since nothing can be more useful or more appropriate to my calling.  But yet, as we know by experience, that an elegant, terse, and polished diction is the greatest recommendation to a man, I do not neglect that best of all guides to eloquence, namely, the exercise of my pen.  Moreover, as our studies, and all the actions of mankind produce more abundant fruit, and daily make improvement, when united with the knowledge of fear of God, I am right, I think, in adding to my studies the godly lectures in divinity of master doctor Peter Martyr.  Besides too, as every one knows the great advantage that arises to study from a friendly intercourse with learned men, I took the liberty in my last letter of requesting from you an introduction to master doctor Peter Martyr, a man most learned in every way, and who is a great patron of literature.  And I have an entire confidence that you will not be wanting to me in this act of generosity, especially when you know it to be so necessary to myself, and so easy for you to perform.
    As to the state of England, I did not know what to write; for it is in the enjoyment of the greatest tranquility.  Good learning is every where flourishing, in spite of the opposition of the patrons of former ignorance; and true religion is triumphing by the aid of the king and the bishops.  Silence is imposed upon those Romanist brawlers whose tongues are only made for slander, although they sometimes raise a wonderful stir.  This, however, is not in open warfare, but they effect every thing by artifice and trickery.  The bishop of Winchester, who had assumed a reputation for true piety when he last gave an account of his faith, and could not be induced to agree in all respects with the other bishops, is cast into prison and deprived of his bishoprick.  The papists are now laboring under great unpopularity; so great indeed, that I very often wonder at their perverseness, who, having been so frequently warned, yea, often too turned into ridicule, do not come to their senses.  But these appearances portend that true religion will continue to be in a most flourishing state.  For thus arose the Roman empire; thus was advanced the glory of the Jews; thus it arose, thus it was extended.  In fine, there is nothing excellent that has not sprung from difficulties at the beginning.
    It is rumored here that the French are again raising troops against England, with the view of seizing upon another harbor for their ships.  Tidings are daily brought to us from Germany, but, as I guess, not without a great mixture of falsehoods: wherefore, lest I should be deemed a liar myself, I forbear to enumerate them.  But should any thing come to light in future, I will inform you of it as quickly and as frequently as possible, provided only you take in good part what I have now written, not as being worthy of your attention, but such as came unpremediated into my mind.  For this intense cold, by which I am frozen, has made me so inactive, and stupid, and listless in writing, that I may well seem, as they say, to have been feeding on wild animals.  For I must freely confess that nothing in England so disturbs and troubles me as the severity of the winter, and the season of Lent, or of fasting.  They allege the ancient custom of the country, which I too should approve of, if my stomach did not require something else.  But, not to detain you any longer from your studies, let this suffice for the present, while I beg and pray you in the mean time to interpret every thing for me with candor according to your singular kindness.  We are anxiously expecting the arrival of Cellarius.  Salute in my name that most excellent and amiable lady your wife.  May Christ, the only hope of godly minds, preserve and support you in good health, and pressing forward towards the things of heaven!  Dated at Oxford, Feb. 21, 1551.
            Your reverence’s most attached,
              CHRISTOPHER FROSCHOVER.

  LETTER CCCXLIII. CHRISTOPHER FROSCHOVER TO RODOLPH GUALTER.
  Oxford
  May 28, 1551
    Greeting.  Your letter, most honored master, of the 19th of April has come to hand, than which nothing more delightful could have happened to me, and from which I perceived the extent of your kind feeling towards me.  This I more especially discovered in your so diligent commendation of me to that most renowned of scholars, master doctor Peter Martyr; which has certainly rendered him not only a friend, but, I should say, the greatest friend to me, and a most active patron and supporter: whereby any one may perceive the extent of his regard for you, which is certainly very great.  But forasmuch as I am unable to return you due thanks for your most friendly services in my behalf, I have been endeavoring to think upon the way by which I may escape the imputation of being ungrateful; namely, by cherishing in grateful recollection and remembrance those benefits of yours which are too great and splendid for my slender and inadequate ability to repay: and this, I hope, will be most of all agreeable to yourself.  I am daily expecting master Christopher Hales, who has already promised you by letter that he will serve me for your sake in any way he can.  For, as I have been told by his servant, he is about to visit oxford, and to remain here for some time, for the purpose of conversation with learned men; and he will not, I trust, be an undesirable friend to me, but rather a patron, and your influence will be of great service in this request.  Moreover, I am no less sensible of your paternal feeling towards me, in that you so faithfully exhort me to study, that I may not disappoint the hopes entertained of me; and especially, that I may be regarded as one desirous of godliness, forasmuch as we all know by experience that the advantages of person and fortune are of no value without a zeal for religion.  The remembrance of your exhortation will never suffer me to forget my duty:  it will admonish me day and night, and, as I hope, be effectual in enabling me to preserve and sustain the opinion that has sometimes been entertained respecting me.
    I would now explain to you the whole state of my affairs, were it not that I should detain you too long from your engagements:  this one thing however I would not have you ignorant of, that I have determined next spring to travel into France with my friend Stumphius, who is recalled by his father; and to remain there, if my uncle will allow me, for some months, that I may also obtain some acquaintance with French affairs.  I sent you an account of my studies in my last letter, which you received, I suppose, after the fair.  The church of England is daily strengthened more and more in the knowledge of the true faith, though she has suffered a severe loss in the death of master Bucer; for she might still have been greatly benefitted by his learning.  You know, I suppose, who have been invited over from Germany to supply his place; among the number of whom are our friend Bibliander, Musculus, Melancthon, and some others, who, however, I hope, will remain in Germany.  And in this respect the English are in my opinion justly worthy of censure, that they are endeavoring to draw away from Germany its men of learning, that they may be able in the meantime to live at ease themselves; for if we diligently look into the facts, we shall find that they have men of higher talent for the most part than the Germans.  This however might be permitted, unless it were done to the injury of others, as it is in the case.  For we perceive the church of Germany and the house of God to be at this time in such a state, as especially to need the guidance of men of that character, lest it should altogether sink under the threatened overthrow.
    In conclusion, I entreat you with your accustomed kindness to put a candid interpretation upon everything concerning me, and not only to regard the thing itself, (I mean my letter,) but the mind of the writer, which is certainly most zealous towards you.  We were anxiously expecting the arrival of George, who, as I understand, is gone to Padua.  I congratulate him very much on his being engaged to be married.  Be pleased to give my most respectful salutations to your wife, and likewise to all your family.  Farewell, most honored master, and may God long preserve you to us in safety!  Commend me to you.  Dated at Oxford, May 28, 1551.  In haste, just as I am about to depart for Cambridge.
            Your most devoted and obedient Son,
                CCHRISTOPHER FROSCHOVER.

  LETTER CCCXLIV. CHRISTOPHER FROSCHOVER TO RODOLPH GUALTER.
  London
  Aug. 12, 1551
    Greeting.  At length, most beloved master, I am learning by daily experience, that no great misfortune can happen to a grateful mind, than the inability of making a return, however trifling, to those to whom one is indebted for the greatest kindness.  And this is altogether the case with me in respect to yourself; whose immense benefits whenever I revolve in my mind, and anxiously look about to see whether I can anywise repay your exceeding kindness, in part at least, if not altogether, so often am I angry with my fates, and complain of them for having placed me in this situation, where I cannot even in the smallest degree recompense those favors, by which you have obliged me, so that you might perceive them to have been conferred upon a grateful recipient.  And this is especially the case, when I call to mind that fatherly recommendation, by which you were pleased to commend me to that most excellent man, master doctor Peter Martyr: for I perceive it to have been not of an ordinary character, but so complete, as to render that most godly man not only my friend, but also my especial patron.  Moreover, when I call to  mind that very pious exhortation in which you advised me to the pursuit of all honorable studies, I feel a vast fire, as it were, within me; for my mind burns to return the obligation, while at the same time it occurs to me, how little my slender ability, and how much your kindness, is able to accomplish:  whence I may be allowed to form the conjecture that your mind is still affected towards me as ever, from your being so desirous that I should be exercised and employed in honorable studies.  But the only method afforded me of returning the obligation is by paying the greatest regard to your advice, and the rule of conduct you have laid down; and by trying myself by it, as gold brought to the touchstone, lest I should seem to have slighted the admonitions of my most revered master; which, as long as the breath of life animates this body, shall not be the case.  Wherefore, since otherwise I am defeated in two ways, and am unable to return any obligation, much less an equivalent, I shall not cease to do what alone is in my power, namely, to bear in remembrance, to love, to thank you with all my strength, that I may not altogether seem ungrateful.
    Master Christopher Hales, who was coming, as we hoped, to Oxford, has not yet arrived; but I think I know the reason, namely, these turbulent times which have lately visited England.  For not long since the disease, which we call the English sweating sickness, pervaded the whole country.  It has relaxed in some measure, but not without causing great mortality.  About two thousand men died at London; at Cambridge two hundred, where also the duke of Suffolk died, together with his younger brother, and many other distinguished characters, whose names do not occur to me.  I am glad for these and also for many other reasons, that our young men have left England; for they staid with me at Oxford during these last three months, and certainly at no small expense.  For the price of every thing is daily increasing more and more, and this by reason of the diminution of the value of money.  This has hitherto been much debased, and being ordered to be restored, by the proclamation of the king’s majesty and his whole council, has lost a fourth of its value, to the great detriment of the people.  I accompanied our friends to London, and there took leave of them.  I could neither see the king, nor have an interview with Hales.  You will learn from Joshua what is going on here.  I would have written more, had they not hastened their departure.  Do you, most distinguished sir, and much honored master, receive with a candid mind what I have now written, and continue to love me as you have done.  Salute, I pray you, most respectfully from me that excellent lady your wife, and all your family.  Farewell, most reverend master.  Dated at London, from Byrchman’s printing office, Aug. 12, 1551.
          Your honor’s most devoted,
            CHRISTOPHER FROSCHOVER.

  LETTER CCCXLV. UNKNOWN TO HENRY BULLINGER
  unknown
  unknown
    Very sad tidings have lately been written to me by my friends from England, of which, as I doubt not but that they are also reported among you, and disfigured and exaggerated by excited feelings of alarm, I shall communicate to your reverence a true but succinct account, by giving you a particular statement of the distressing facts.  The nobility of the kingdom of England, perceiving with much sorrow and indignation that those defenses, which King Henry VIII. of pious memory had erected at very great expense for the fortifying and preservation of Boulogne, were now taken after a slight struggle by the king of France, and that the loss and destruction of those forts had arisen from the negligence and penuriousness of the lord Protector, called together the Londoners by sound of trumpet on the 8th of October, and commanded the heralds to make proclamation that no one should from henceforth render obedience to any letters or orders issued by the above named Protector, the duke of Somerset, even though they should be confirmed under the king’s hand and seal: for that his most negligent administration had occasioned the utmost disgrace and irreparable injury to the kingdom, inasmuch as, disregarding the matured and strenuous charge of the noble and honorable council, as also the complaints of those governors who had charge of the garrisons in the parts beyond sea, he neglected to fortify and furnish with supplies those same garrisons, with such care and diligence as his duty required; so that by his neglect and omission they have been taken by the French, to the perpetual disgrace and danger of the realm.  The king’s money too, which he ought to have expended upon the defense and fortification of the kingdom, he had lavished in these times of war upon most sumptuous buildings, and has defrauded of their due pay for many months the king’s army, anxious to fight both against the Scots and the French, at home and abroad, at the risk and danger of their lives, in defense of the king’s majesty, and for the maintenance and increase of the honor of the realm:  and therefore they (the council) moved by these evils, both as nobles of the kingdom, and also as appointed by his father as guardians to the son, were compelled by their duty and allegiance to remove the protector from the government, and to take it upon themselves with due care and solicitude; lest, when hereafter called upon to give up an account of their guardianship, they should render themselves liable to a heavier accusation than they shall be able to reply to.  That they therefore enjoined all the subjects of the most serene king, not to interfere or bestir themselves in the matter: for that this change was made for no other cause than from a regard to the public welfare.  The people having been forewarned by this proclamation, tranquility followed throughout the kingdom.
    At the time these things were taking place in London, the protector, who had the king in his power in Windsor castle, being first deserted by all the nobility, (and the king afterwards being brought to London by the council,) was at length conveyed a prisoner to the Tower of London on the 16th of October, together with three other persons, who alone were partakers in, and cognisant of, all his actions.  This is a true and succinct account of the change that has taken place in England.  And I know, first from the private letters of my friends, and next from the proclamations published under the king’s seal, and confirmed by the subscription of all the nobility and royal councilors, that it did not originate in any ambitious motive, or in a dislike or hatred to religion; but that it was occasioned by the just grief and indignation arising from the loss of the garrisons and forts which had been erected by King Henry of pious memory, at very great expense, for the preservation of Boulogne: so that the necessity and welfare of the kingdom compelled those persons, whom both their private and public character, and the weight of the charge entrusted to them, obliges to act in a case of this kind, to take more accurate order in the administration of affairs.  By this explanation of the change you will be able to comfort both yourself and your friends; for I know that most groundless and false representations are every where made respecting it, according to the inclination of each individual who spreads the report.

  LETTER CCCXLVI. FRANCIS BOURGOYNE TO JOHN CALVIN.
  London
  Dec. 4, 1550.
  background: excerpt of the full letter
    You have been informed, I suppose, long since both by my letter to my brother, and that of Utenhovius to yourself, that our Josiah, the king of England, made most courteous inquiry of me concerning your health and ministry.  To which when I had made such reply as in my judgment I considered worthy of you, he sufficiently declared both by his countenance and his words, that he takes a great interest in you, and in every thing belonging to you.  Mention was incidentally made of the letter which you once sent to be delivered to his uncle, the then protector of the kingdom, and which he declared to have been exceedingly gratifying to him.  From that time, therefore, I have thought it would be well worth your while, if, availing yourself of this opportunity and subject, (unless you have, it may be, something better, or see more deeply than I do,) you would send him such a letter as would add spurs to a willing horse.  The king supports and encourages pure religion and godly and learned men to the utmost of his power, and would effect much more if his age allowed him.

  LETTER CCCXLVII. FRANCIS BOURGOYNE TO JOHN CALVIN.
  London
  Jan. 22, 1552
    Greeting.  Unless complaint afforded relief to distress of mind, and especially such complaint as is poured into the bosom of a Christian friend, I should far rather choose, my very dear sir, with Timon, to hide myself in some silent corner than to give utterance to a single word; or, if I must make the attempt, I should employ my pen in writing an elegy rather than a letter.  But as I entertain such an opinion of you, that I think there is no one who sympathizes in a more Christian manner with the misfortunes of the distressed, and as I am, too, in some measure apprehensive on my now recalling you to my remembrance, that I have hitherto been more tardy in the duty of writing to you than I ought to have been, I have determined to be no longer silent.  Therefore, that I  may in the first place explain to you the cause of my grief, hence arise our tears, hence arises the all but universal distress, that on this very day, about 9 o’clock, the duke of Somerset of pious memory, when hardly any person looked for or suspected such an event, was led out publicly to execution.  I myself, for certain reasons, was not present at the sight; but many of our friends, with whom you are well acquainted, met me in the street immediately after the event had taken place, and related to me in order, but not with dry eyes, what they had seen and heard.  Among them was our godly preacher master Richard, Utenhovius, and very many of that class: some of whom, understanding English, carefully noted almost every word of the dying nobleman.  They tell me, among other things, that he said to the people standing around him, “I am about to die, good people, and confess that I justly deserve to die for having offended against the laws of my country and the king’s commands; from obedience to which, as they are made for all, it was neither just nor reasonable that I should be exempted.  But I profess that by the goodness of God there remains to me this testimony of commendation and innocence, that I have hitherto conducted myself without blame in the cause of religion, and in my duty to my king and country: for God and my conscience is witness, that I have used all my endeavors and exertions to this end, that the cause of religion, the education of the king, the welfare and security of the realm might be consulted and provided for in the best possible way.  Whence it is that I shall undergo this death with an undisturbed and ready mind, feeling assured, as I now heartily implore my God, that the crimes which I have acknowledged are forgiven me, as I now freely forgive all persons all their offenses against me.  But let it be the care of you all, and which I earnestly entreat from every one of you, to pray the Lord for me, and not through grief and excitement at this my punishment to raise any disturbance, or even to wish that my life could be restored, which I do not myself desire to be prolonged; and besides I would rather that each one of you would bear this with the same equanimity and fortitude, as I am now content to have myself and my case thus dealt with.  Moreover, obey the king and his nobles and councilors in all things,  Let God and the gospel of Jesus Christ hold, as is fitting, the chief place in your regard; and if at least you would profit by my example, show careful obedience to the laws of your country, civil and political, and never violate them.”
    They state that he spake all this, and whatever else he said, with a look and gesture becoming the firmness of a hero, and the modesty of a Christian; that he was splendidly attired, as he used to be when about to attend upon the king, or to appear in public on any especial occasion; that he gave the executioner some gold rings which he drew from his fingers, together with all his clothes; only to a certain gentleman, the lieutenant of the Tower of London, in which he had been confined, he gave his sword and upper garment.  What weeping, and wailing, and lamentation, followed upon the death of this nobleman, is as difficult to describe as to believe.  it is stated by some persons who belong to the household of some of the councilors, and who are not altogether unacquainted with the affairs of court, that by the royal indulgence the capital punishment had been remitted, with a free pardon, while the duke was yet in prison, and that the whole council sent to inform him of it more than once; but when he rejected with contempt the grace and kindness that was offered him, (I know not whether in reliance on his own innocence, or on the favor of the king and of some other parties, or on his own influence, and wealth, and rank, or on some other delusive persuasion,) the whole council were at length so irritated by this conduct, that they determined that they would no longer endure that excessive arrogance of the man, which made it quite evident that should he be released from imprisonment, he would not, for the sake of avenging himself, refrain from raising disturbances and tumults, and intestine commotions that would endanger the whole kingdom.  Besides, as it is probable that none of them would be so safe and secure, as not hereafter to apprehend some impending mischief from a prisoner whom they had unanimously condemned to death, especially the primary authors of this calamity, their minds could never be satisfied unless by the removal of one whom they were afraid of when alive.  And thus was realized the saying of Sinon in the poet,
        “On one devoted head 
        They seek to launch the vengeance that they dread.”
  But however this might be, it is quite evident, in my opinion, that the deceased nobleman, like other men, was not without his faults, and those perhaps more grievous than could be passed over by God without punishment in this life: wherefore I conclude from hence that God would have the wonderful mystery of his hidden judgment to be made known; and upon a more accurate consideration of the subject, I can scarcely doubt but that you and all godly persons will be of the same opinion  This man was endowed and enriched with most excellent gifts of God both in body and mind, as I am well aware you have in great measure been informed by others.  But is not that, I ask, the best gift, that God has chosen the light of the gospel to shine forth by his instrumentality throughout this kingdom, that the Son of God has presented himself to the people of Britain, as it were by his hand?  I do not now mention how God had so exalted him, from being born in a private station, that as the late king’s brother-in-law, the brother of a queen, the uncle of the present king, he had no one here superior to him in any degree of honor; and then especially, when appointed lord protector of the realm, he was all but king, or rather esteemed by every one as the king of the king.  I omit to tell you how wonderfully God preserved him from capital punishment, when those great disturbances, of which you have heard, were stirred up against him.  Though I am acquainted with many other circumstances of the same kind, for the sake of brevity I pass them over.  I know assuredly, and have ascertained in many ways, that he did not always use these mercies of God, as a Christian should do, but rather, that he grievously and wickedly abused them, although I think that you never knew any of these things, or could have any suspicion of them.  Master à Lasco himself, with whom you are acquainted, can bear sufficient testimony, among others, that during almost the whole time when we were both of us here together, he had become so lukewarm in the service of Christ as scarcely to have any thing less at heart than the state of religion in this country.  Nor indeed did he retain in this respect any thing worthy of commendation, excepting that, as far as words go, he always professed himself a gospeller when occasion required such acknowledgment; but yet so that he could not in reality be found fault with by any one, for showing himself opposed to good and Christian actions.  But not even this can be allowed him from the time I have now mentioned, that he seriously and heartily employed his authority for the advancement of godliness; and I fear, as far as I have been able to discover the disposition of the man, that if it had been more for his interest to have followed a different course, he would some time or other have made his recantation.  For when he manifested certain instances of his liberality and munificence both to yourself, and also very lately to your friend Nicolas for your sake, and to many other persons professing godliness, I know with greater certainty than I could wish, that this was done more for the sake of pleasing man than God; and that it was rather on this ground, that he was unwilling to lose the reputation which he had acquired, than from a sincere regard to godliness.  This indeed was not altogether unknown to me, when I was lately with you at Geneva; but as I did not yet despair but that, while he was living, Christ would be preached on every opportunity by his authority more than he had ever been before; and even that he might be induced to reform his life, and repent, which I always believed would be effected rather by you than by any other person, so greatly did he esteem you, (for which reason also I exhorted you the more to write to him, particularly as I suspected that, having been somewhat estranged from him through that messenger of mine, you no longer thought proper to do so,) I considered it best to be silent with you on the subject.
    It was notorious to every one in this kingdom that he was the occasion of his brother’s death, who, having been convicted on a charge of treason which no one could prove against him by legal evidence, and of which when brought to execution he perseveringly denied the truth, was beheaded owing to his information, instigated by I know not what hatred and rivalry against his brother.  Who is there, that, knowing this to be the case, must not forthwith conclude that the awful denunciations and judgments of God against Cain in the fourth chapter of Genesis may be applied in the present instance?  And, as I have diligently been informed by those who saw and heard these things, after that murder had been perpetrated, our duke was no longer like himself, but began to labor under those misfortunes which I have above hinted at.  And not long after there followed those disturbances which made him, from being the lord protector of the kingdom, a miserable prisoner universally detested and despised.  And a certain godly and honorable lady of this country, with whom I am acquainted, is reported to have exclaimed upon that occasion, “Where is thy brother?  Lo! his blood crieth against thee unto God from the ground.”  In fine, that very act, for which he was last of all thrown into prison, was both unworthy of a Christian such as he professed himself to be, and also sufficiently shows that the most part of the crimes, which I have laid to his charge, have their foundation in truth.  For he was himself the head and author of a certain conspiracy against the whole of the royal council, and more particularly against the duke of Northumberland, lately called the earl of Warwick, whom he pursued with the most unrelenting hatred, as having been foremost in depriving him of the rank of protector, and being himself regarded from that time by the king’s councilors as occupying that office; the duke of Somerset, I say, gained over some accomplices in this conspiracy even from among the council itself, (who are now in prison awaiting the king’s pleasure respecting them,) by which it was agreed among them, that on the duke of Northumberland being dispatched (together with any of his friends who should oppose their views) either by violence, or in secret, or in any other way, they should place the entire administration of the kingdom in their own hands, but that the duke of Somerset should be invested with the chief authority, or even be restored to the office of protector.
    I know there is now no occasion for me to follow up the details of this and of his other actions to greater length, and show you how diametrically opposite they are to the word of God, and the profession of Christianity.  For you will yourself, with your usual discrimination, not only understand this, but likewise all my feelings, and the object of all that I have said.  I think therefore that, for the sake of brevity, I must now conclude, that, though I look upon this punishment to have been inflicted upon this deceased nobleman by a certain necessity for divine judgment, yet, since at his death he manifested some favorable marks of Christian penitence, I consider that God has not only chosen in this case to make known to us the mystery of his judgment, but also that of his infinite mercy, by which he kills and makes alive, brings down to the grave and brings back; whereby he would have the body to be destroyed for the salvation of the soul, and that one should be cast down in this life, whom he chooses to be exalted in a future one.  And the consideration indeed of this circumstance, though it should afford no small comfort to me and to every one, yet cannot at once divest me of all sorrow at his death.  And indeed I should be more than ordinarily cruel and unfeeling, could I bury so recent a calamity in immediate oblivion.  Yet two reasons are presented to my mind which increase my regret:  one of them is, that we have lost so great a man, and one who was not so entirely corrupted but that there remained some hope both of his reformation, and also that the interest of the gospel would in any case be advanced by his authority and protection, since there is certainly the greatest scarcity and want of such characters in this country.  Then, also, it seems to me to be a cause of the greatest lamentation and sorrow, that his life, imprisonment, and execution, were, and are, and will be, a stumbling-block to many persons, to the great contempt and injury of the gospel and of godliness.
    I now proceed to certain other matters.  The lord archbishop of Canterbury, master à Lasco, Utenhovius, Richard the minister of our church, having received your letters through me, requested me, on my writing to you, to make their excuses, that, for various reasons, they have not forthwith returned an answer; and also to salute you most dutifully in the name of them all, with the promise that they will all of them write to you when they have more leisure, and more important subjects to write about.  London, Jan. 22, 1552.
              Yours, 
              FRANCIS BURGOYNE.

  LETTER CCCXLVIII. VALERANDUS POLLANUS TO JOHN CALVIN.
  London
  March 7, 1552
    Greeting.  An intimate friend of mine, a learned and godly man, has advised and urgently entreated me to advertise you, at the first opportunity, of the circumstances I am about to mention.  He understood, he said, you were exceedingly distressed at the death of the duke of Somerset, as I dare affirm that all godly persons are in this country; and that even the chief nobility themselves have not witnessed so great a fall of a character so illustrious without the greatest sorrow of mind.  But these are examples of the judgments of the Lord, by which all persons are reminded that they should fear the Lord, cherish true godliness without hypocrisy, and not abuse to their own lusts the doctrine of the gospel.  But my informant added, moreover, that you had some intention of writing, I know not what, against our people respecting his death, and even to the king himself; to which I, who well know your discretion, replied, that it could not be the case.  He persisted, however, in urging me to write to you upon the subject, that you may not inconsiderately publish any thing, by which a fresh flame may be rekindled, or the minds of certain parties be irritated against the professors of the gospel.  If I had a messenger at hand, I would now lay before you the whole case, though I had rather relate the whole affair by word of mouth to some one upon whom I could depend.  For I have no doubt but that many persons make various statements, according as they are individually affected, while but few are made with judgment.  If any one has had reason to grieve at this great calamity, it is surely myself, who have experienced by manifest proofs, that he entertained a regard both for me and for my little church which I had gathered together in his duchy a year ago.  But when I consider the providence of God, and the severity of his judgments, first of all upon his own people, and then upon those who are aliens from his election; here I restrain myself, and am content to commend his church and the whole ministry to him in continual prayer, that every one of us, aided by his Spirit, may rightly be employed in his house, and, mindful of our calling, entirely devote ourselves to the edifying of his church.  Want of time compels me to conclude against my wishes.  Farewell, and salute all your fellow-ministers and all godly persons in my name.  If I can in any way be useful to you, I offer you all my services.  London, March 7, 152.
            Your ever most attached pupil,
              VALERANDUS POLLANUS.
    If you think this letter worthy of a reply, send your answer to my friend master Richard, minister of the French church in London; for I shall shortly be obliged to return to Glastonbury, where God, by the instrumentality of the duke, and lately too by that of the king, has appointed me the superintendent of the foreigners’church.

  LETTER CCCXLIX. HENRY BULLINGER TO JOHN BURCHER.
  Zurich
  June 28, 1549
    Greeting.  I have duly received, Burcher, your letters of the 30th of May and the 1st of June, and I thank you for your fidelity and attention.  I should very much like to see the book of the Anglican religion.  You will therefore exceedingly oblige me by procuring me a copy.  Should you receive any letters for me from England, I pray you to see that they be safely forwarded to me.  If you have received any certain intelligence respecting our friend Hooper, and likewise how Bucer is conducting himself in England, I beg you will let me know; as also, lastly, how our friend Richard [Hilles] is going on, and what is the present state of your kingdom.  You probably know what the emperor is doing, or where he now is.  As for ourselves here, we have not heard anything about him.  That nobleman of Ghent, ab Utenhoven, far exceeded your commendation of him.  He is without his equal, and I thank you that by your instrumentality and that of my friend Hooper I have contracted an intimacy with one who is in every way so distinguished.  I have nothing farther to communicate respecting our affairs in Switzerland, than that every thing is quiet among us; except that those states which have made an alliance with France are at some little disagreement among themselves, by reason of there being many among them who still disapprove that alliance.  But there is the greatest harmony among the Christian cities, who with one consent renounced that alliance.  Some other states have also renounced it; but those which have admitted it are not on bad terms with those which have refused, although they wished that all would act as they themselves have done.  Among other things, these words are inserted in the treaty:  “and should the king’s majesty aforesaid require assistance for the subjugation of the city or Boulogne, and the dominions of the Boulognois in Picardy, the confederates are bound to afford it, as has been before suffered by others of our free provinces.”  You see whither these sanguinary princes are endeavoring to drag us along with themselves.  Oh! I wish the king of England would send a short letter to all the Swiss, not with a view of making any request, but only with that of vindicating and defending his right, and, in fine, exhorting them not to persist in waging war against one who had done nothing to deserve it.
    Farewell, my Burcher, and diligently write me an account of every thing.  Farewell again and again.  I am exerting myself to procure the payment of the salary of your wife’s brother, and shall repeat my endeavors to-morrow.  The Lord knows how I shall succeed.  I bid farewell also to your wife.  Salute all our friends and sisters in England.  Zurich, June 28, 1549.
            Yours, you know who,
              [HENRY BULLINGER.]

  LETTER CCCL.HENRY BULLINGER TO THEODORE BEZA.
  Zurich
  Aug. 30, 1553.
    Greeting.  The youth who brought me your most welcome letter found me engaged in a great variety of business, so that I have hardly had it in my power to write this in reply.  You have been informed by our friend Gualter what is to be done with the boy.  I am sure that he will be a father to him, and I myself will not be wanting to him, were it only for the sake of my friend Calvin.
    The day before yesterday I received a letter from Bassefontaine the king’s envoy, written at Soleure on the 27th of this month; who mentions among other things, that an English nobleman lately passed through that city on his way to Rome, whither he was sent by [queen] Mary to recall that Reginald Pole, who is too well known both to you and to myself: for that English Athaliah desires the benefit of his presence and his counsel.  Scarcely has any other thing so much distressed me as this English affair.  I am hourly expecting more certain information, of which I will not fail to let you know.  Oh! how truly wretched are the times into which our good Lord has thought fit for us to enter!  Let us earnestly implore his mercy, that he may show pity upon us and upon his most afflicted church.  But where is our Martyr?  Where John à Lasco?  Where is Hooper, bishop of Worcester?  Where is Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury?  Where is the duke of Suffolk?  Where are numberless other excellent men?  Lord, have mercy upon them!  I cannot easily express how greatly these things distress me.
    The French fleet has pillaged and set fire to many towns in Calabria.  They have taken and burnt the cities of Aliaca in Sicily, and Nori in Sardinia, and are now laying siege to Elba in the Mediterranean, belonging to the duke of Florence.  In Germany every thing is in a most grievous and deplorable state.  But what is your most honorable senate of Geneva going to do with that blasphemous wretch Servetus?  If they are wise, and to their duty, they will put him to death, that all the world may perceive that Geneva desires the glory of Christ to be maintained inviolate.  Farewell, my very dear friend.  Salute for me Calvin, Viret, Farell, and all good men.  August 30, 1553.
            Yours,
              BULLINGER.

  LETTER CCCLI. HENRY BULLINGER TO JOHN CALVIN.
  Zurich
  Oct. 15, 1553
    It is wonderful, my honored master and dearly beloved brother, how greatly I desire to hear of the state of your affairs, by a letter from yourself.  I well know that my opinion against Servetus and the assurance of my approval have been laid before you.  And at the same time our most honorable senate wrote to yours, seriously exhorting them to put a stop to this pestilence.  What reply has been made by other cities and ministers of churches, I do not yet know.  We pray God in the mean time to preserve and defend your church.
    As to the state of affairs in England, you will learn it from the enclosed letter sent to me within these few days, from a prison in London, by the godly bishop of Worchester and Gloucester, whom I suspect by this time to have been removed from this world.  He writes me word that divine things are trodden under foot, and that human things have the pre-eminence.  The duke of Northumberland is executed, the duke of Suffolk was thrown into prison, but, being innocent, was discharged shortly afterwards; but having been attacked by disease, he is reported to have departed to the Lord.  That most excellent man, the archbishop of Canterbury, is deposed, and Pole is appointed in his place.  They are now holding the parliament after the queen’s coronation.  It began to-day.
    Of masters John à Lasco, Martyr, Cox, Sidall, and the other most godly servants of God and very dear brethren, I have not any certain information.  Should you learn anything from your friends, either better or worse, do not fail to let me know.  My the Lord visit our people, and soon cast down the crown of antichrist!  He permits many things, that his tried ones may be approved.  Let us pray the Lord to preserve his people in these sad commotions, and to beat down Satan under his feet.  Farewell for ever with all the ministers and brethren our fellow-laborers.  In the greatest haste.  Zurich, Oct. 15, 1553.
              Yours,
                BULLINGER.

  LETTER CCCLII. HENRY BULLINGER TO JOHN CALVIN.
  Zurich
  March 26, 1554.
    Greeting.  I return you my best thanks, honored master and very dear brother, as well for your most friendly letter as for the present you have made me of a copy of your book.  Haller, to whom you had sent it, has only forwarded it to me within these eight days, so that I have not yet been able to read it through, as I have been entirely occupied during the whole of last week with the duties of the pulpit.  I have, however, taken a cursory view of it, and perceive that you have inserted my letter, and at the same time made honorable mention of our church; for which I thank you.  I have no doubt but that you handle every thing with the most perfect faithfulness.  I only fear that your book will not be so acceptable to many of the more simple-minded persons, who nevertheless are much attached both to yourself and to the truth, by reason of its brevity, and consequent obscurity, and the weightiness of the subject.  And indeed your style appears somewhat perplexed, especially in this work.  Nevertheless I acknowledge that all good men are much indebted to you, and that those who are more learned are exceedingly so.  I know that you will kindly take this freedom of mine; for I love you from my heart.
    I have enclosed in this letter the answer I made to the Scotsman whom you commended to me.  You will return it to me when you have an opportunity.  I commend to your kindness and hospitality these two Englishmen, one of whom, Thomas Lever, used to preach before the king; the other is an individual of rank.  The former is a learned and very godly man.  They have been my guests about a fortnight, and I am greatly delighted with their piety.  They have expressed their intention of remaining in your town for some time.  I pray you therefore to be pleased, if you can, to show yourselves faithful and friendly hosts.  Whatever kindness you may show them, I shall consider as conferred upon myself; nay, rather, you will confer it upon Christ.  I hope that you have long since received my books upon “The grace of God justifying us for Christ’s sake by faith only;” for I sent it for you to master Haller.  Farewell, and ever remember me in your prayers.  All our fellow-ministers are well.  The emperor is preparing for a serious war with the French; and the Germans, divided into many parties, are suffering the punishment of their ingratitude.  Zurich, March 26, 1554.
              Yours,
                BULLINGER.
  [The following is the enclosure referred to in the above Letter.]
  An answer given to a certain Scotsman, in reply to some questions concerning the kingdom of
    Scotland and England.
    1.  Whether the son of a king, upon his father’s death, though unable by reason of his tender age to conduct the government of the kingdom, is nevertheless by right of inheritance to be regarded as a lawful magistrate, and as such to be obeyed as of divine right?
    That person is, in my opinion, to be esteemed as a lawful king, who is ordained according to the just laws of the country.  And thus it is clear that Edward VI. of happy memory was ordained.  For his father on his death-bed appointed him king, and so claimed for him the right of sovereignty, which they say is hereditary.  The states of the kingdom acknowledged him, as they testified by his coronation.  They provided him with councilors, endued as he was with great gifts of God; nor was any thing wanting to that kingdom, which is wont to be looked for in the most prosperous kingdom elsewhere.  He was therefore a lawful sovereign, and his laws and ordinances demanded obedience; and he ruled the kingdom after a more godly manner than the three most wise and prosperous kings of that country who immediately preceded him.
    2.  Whether a female can preside over, and rule a kingdom by divine right, and so transfer the right of sovereignty to her husband?
    The law of God ordains the woman to be in subjection, and not to rule; which is clear from the writings of both the old and the new Testament.  But if a woman in compliance with, or in obedience to the laws and customs of the realm, is acknowledged as queen, and, in maintenance of the hereditary right of government, is married to a husband, or in the meantime holds the reins of government by means of her councilors, it is a hazardous thing for godly persons to set themselves in opposition to political regulations; especially as the gospel does not seem to unsettle or abrogate hereditary rights, and the political laws of kingdoms; nor do we read that Philip the eunuch, by right of the gospel, drove out Candace from the kingdom of Ethiopia.  And if the reigning sovereign be not a Deborah, but an ungodly and tyrannous ruler of the kingdom, godly persons have an example and consolation in the case of Athaliah.  The Lord will in his own time destroy unjust governments by his own people, to whom he will supply proper qualifications for this purpose, as he formerly did to Jerubbaal, and the Maccabees, and Jehoiada.  With respect however to her right of transferring the power of government to her husband, those persons who are acquainted with the laws and customs of the realm can furnish the proper answer.
    3.  Whether obedience is to be rendered to a magistrate who enforces idolatry and condemns true religion; and whether those authorities, who are still in military occupation of towns and fortresses, are permitted to repel this ungodly violence from themselves and their friends.
    The history of Daniel, and the express command of God Matt. x., and the examples of the apostles in Acts iv. and v., as also that of many of the martyrs in ecclesiastical history, teach us that we must not obey the king or magistrate when their commands are opposed to God and his lawful worship; but rather that we should expose our persons, and lives, and fortunes to danger.  This power is the power of darkness, as the Lord says in the gospel.  And Eusebius records, in the ninth book and eighth chapter of his Ecclesiastical history, that the Armenians took arms against their lawful sovereigns the Roman emperors, who desired to force them to idolatry.  And this conduct of theirs is not reproved.  Those very Armenians, many years after, by reason of the ungodliness of the kings of Persia, slew their ungodly commanders, and revolted to the emperor Justin, as is recorded by Evagrius. [Eccl. Hist. v. 8.]  For the holy scripture not only permits, but even enjoins upon the magistrate a just and necessary defense.  But as other objects are often aimed at under the pretext of a just and necessary assertion or maintenance of right, and the worst characters mix themselves with the good, and the times too are full of danger; it is very difficult to pronounce upon every particular case.  For an accurate knowledge of the circumstances is here of great importance; and as I do not posses such knowledge, it would be very foolish in me to recommend or determine any thing specific upon the subject.  For even Paul, we read, made use of the Roman soldiery against those who plotted against him, and was right in doing so; yet at another time, though under almost the same or similar circumstances, he is recorded to have used only the arms of patience, and none else.  There is need therefore, in cases of this kind, of much prayer, and much wisdom, lest by precipitancy and corrupt affections we should so act as to occasion mischief to many worthy persons.  Meanwhile, however, death itself is far preferable to the admission of idolatry.
    4.  To which party must godly persons attach themselves, in the case of a religious nobility resisting an idolatrous sovereign?
    I leave this to be decided by the judgment of godly persons, who are well acquainted with all the circumstances, who look up in all things to the word of God, who attempt nothing contrary to the laws of God, who obey the impulses of the Holy Ghost, and who are guided by circumstances of place, time, opportunity, persons, and things, without making rash attempt, and who can therefore be directed more safely by their own sense of duty than by the consciences of others.  But I would advise them, above all things, that those causes may be removed, on account of which hypocrites are predominant; iniquities, I mean, that we may become reconciled to God by a true repentance, and implore his counsel and assistance.  He is the only and the true deliverer; and, as we read in the books of Judges and Kings, and the ecclesiastical histories, has never been wanting to his church.  Let us lift up our eyes to him, waiting for his deliverance, abstaining in the meantime from all superstition and idolatry, and doing what he reveals to us in his word.

  LETTER CCCLIII. HENRY BULLI8NGER TO CERTAIN ENGLISHMEN.
  Zurich
  Aug. 24, 1554
    Greeting.  Our Lord Jesus Christ not only requires believers to befriend his banished ones themselves, but also to procure for them the favor of all godly persons, and by pleading their cause in all quarters to aid them in every possible way.  For this reason we do not hesitate to commend to your kindness your English exiles, whom our most honorable magistrates here have taken into their protection, and to whom we wish well from our hearts.  They have hitherto lived among us in the sincere fear of God, in true godliness, in constant prayer, in godly discipline, and in purity and innocence of life.  They have, as far as we know, afforded no occasion of offence to any one; they have not injured or been troublesome to any one; they are beloved by all godly persons; they are so devoted to, and so greatly profit by, their literary and theological studies, that it is impossible not to expect from them the most abundant fruit.  Should they go on as they have begun, there is no doubt but that they will be a benefit and advantage to the renowned kingdom of England.  For though England at this present time neither regards nor requires them and their progress in learning and godliness, we nevertheless entertain the hope that other and happier times will at length arrive; especially when we see that changes in kingdoms are of very frequent occurrence, and in a word, that the grace of Christ is denied to none, so that the man who has lately been a most active persecutor of Christ and his gospel, may soon perhaps become a most zealous preacher of the gospel.
    You will therefore, honored friends and brethren, act with the greatest wisdom as well as godliness, by not withdrawing your support from the deserving and hopeful members of Christ, who stand in heed of your assistance.  You know what praise and honor in the sight of God and men Obadiah, the governor of the house of the ungodly king Ahab, procured to himself, because, at the utmost risk both of his life and property, (living as he did in those most perilous times, when queen Jezebel purposed to destroy all the prophets of God, either by the sword, or to make them perish with hunger,) he fed even whole schools of the prophets in caves and secret places.  And indeed these your countrymen are so far from abounding in luxury, that they seem to the most careful observers to deny themselves even what is necessary for their support, and live far too sparingly.  And I wish that many among ourselves had the same power of showing kindness to them, as we should otherwise have the inclination; for they would then be richer than they are at present.  But inasmuch as God has blessed you, and has not only bestowed upon you more ample means, but has also afforded you this seasonable opportunity of benefiting your countrymen; your charity will understand how acceptable a sacrifice you will offer to God, and how greatly you will improve your own circumstances, if you continue to show liberality to these your countrymen, who are true members of Christ.  For you are aware that Paul, the holy apostle of Christ, in more than one place calls the collection made by the rich, on behalf of those who were in banishment and poverty by reason of the gospel of Christ, “an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God.”  [Phil. iv. 18.]  The same apostle too adds:  “My God shall supply all your need according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus.”  And again, in another place:  “God is able,” he says, “to make all grace abound towards you, that ye, always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good work; as it is written, He hath dispersed abroad, he hath given to the poor; his righteousness remaineth for ever.” [2 Cor. ix. 8, 9.]  And the Lord Jesus himself expressly declares in his gospel:  “He that receiveth you, receiveth me; and he that receiveth me, receiveth him that sent me.  He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive a prophet’s reward; and whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, verily, I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward.” [Matt. x. 40—42.]  For the same Lord declares in another place:  “I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me,” &c.  “Verily, I say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.” [Matt xxv. 35, 40.]  And Christ our Lord promises to such persons all manner of  blessing, and a happy life.  And we read also that David sung: “Blessed is the man that considereth the poor and needy; the Lord will deliver him in the time of trouble.  The Lord preserve him and keep him alive, and make him blessed upon the earth, and not deliver him into the hand of his enemies.  The Lord comfort him upon his bed of languishing; thou wilt make all his bed in his sickness,” &c. [Ps. xli. 1, &c.]  All the words of God are true, steadfast, and undoubted.  For heaven and earth shall pass away, but the eternal word of God shall never perish, nor shall one jot or title fall from it.
    Believing therefore in these most certain declarations of God, earnestly endeavor, brethren and friends beloved in the Lord, by a plenteous sowing and liberal contribution to prepare for yourselves against that day an abundant harvest, and one that will satisfy you for eternity, through Christ our Lord.  Fare ye well, and receive this our exhortation with kindness as from your friends and brethren.  Zurich, Aug. 24, 1554.
              HENRY BULLINGER,
            In the name of all the pastors, readers, and ministers of the church of Zurich.

  LETTER CCCLIV. HENRY BULLINGER TO JOHN CALVIN.
  Zurich
  Sept. 9, 1554
  background: Extract of the full letter.
    Lever is in good heath, as, thank God, are also the rest of our English; but they are exceedingly grieved, and not without reason, at the ingratitude of their afflicted country.  You know that she has admitted the Spaniard, who has handselled his government with the blood of two noblemen whom he has beheaded.  They fear lest those most holy bishops, Latimer, Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, &c. have been cut off by this time.  I see that we must pray unceasingly for that most afflicted church.

  LETTER CCCLV.HENRY BULLINGER TO JOHN CALVIN.
  unknown
  unknown
  background: Extract of the full letter.
    My friends write me word that those excellent men and my very dear brothers, master Latimer, and master Ridley bishop of London, were burned in the sight of Cranmer, who testified however that this punishment was more grievous to him than death itself, namely, that he was not offered to the Lord on the same funeral pile with his brethren.  He was led back in chains to prison, and it is supposed that he also is by this time reduced to ashes.
    They say that the emperor is about to sail into Spain, but that he will previously place on Philip’s head the crown of England; for they think he will visit that country in the course of his journey.  The Lord protect his faithful people, and recompense the bloody men on their own heads!

  LETTER CCCLVI. ROBERT HORN AND OTHERS TO THE MAGISTRATES AT ZURICH.
  Zurich
  1554
    Forasmuch as we are exiled, most honorable magistrates, from England, our beloved country, and for the sake of that light of divine truth by which she was lately distinguished, we humbly request of your worthiness, that we may be permitted to sojourn in this most famous city, relying upon and supported by your sanction, decree, and protection against the violence of those, should any such be found, who would oppose and molest us.  The Lord knows, for whose sake we have left our all, that we seek for nothing besides himself.  And for this reason chiefly we have unanimously and with ready minds come to this place, where he is most sincerely preached and most purely worshipped.  This being the case, we entertain the hope that, as you are most zealous defenders of the true Christian religion, so you will protect us by your authority, who by reason of the same are exiled and homeless.  May the Lord Jesus long preserve you and this your illustrious state in safety and prosperity!  Your most humble petitioners,
      ROBERT HORN.       
      MARGERY HIS WIFE.   
      JAMES PILKINGTON.   
      THOMAS LEVER.     
      JOHN MULLINS.     
      THOMAS BENTHAM.   
      RICHARD CHAMBERS.
      THOMAS SPENCER.
      HENRY COCKRAFT.
      MICHAEL RENIGER.
      LAURENCE HUMPHREY.
      WILLIAM COLE.

  LETTER CCCLVII. RICHARD COX AND OTHERS TO JOHN CALVIN.
  Frankfort
  April 5, 1555
    Greeting.  After that our very dear brother Thomas Sampson had communicated to us sometime since the letter that you wrote to him touching our common controversy with certain brethren, we considered it a mark of our duty and regard to you to inform you, as early as possible, of all that has been done, and with what design.  But though it may perhaps seem to you somewhat late to write to you, when the matter is altogether brought to a termination; yet we implore you by Jesus Christ, not to suppose that the delay has arisen from any desire unduly to undervalue your authority.  For it both is, and ought to be, most highly esteemed and regarded, not only by ourselves, but by the world at large.  But since your reverence was many days’ journey distant from us, and because there was great hope that all that controversy could be settled with less inconvenience between the brethren themselves, we were unwilling to disturb your most important meditations by our trifling and domestic concerns.  But though we are very loth to suspect our brethren of any thing that savors of insincerity, we are nevertheless somewhat afraid that the whole affair and case has not been set before you with sufficient explicitness.  For neither are we so entirely wedded to our country, as not to be able to endure any customs differing from our own; nor is the authority of those fathers and martyrs of Christ so much regarded by us, as that we have any scruple in thinking or acting in opposition to it.  And we have not only very frequently borne witness to this by our assertions, but have at length proved it by our actions.  For when the magistrates lately gave us permission to adopt the rites of our native country, we freely relinquished all those ceremonies which were regarded by our brethren as offensive and inconvenient.  For we gave up private baptisms, confirmation of children, saints’ days, kneeling at the holy communion, the linen surplices of the ministers, crosses, and other things of the like character.  And we gave them up, not as being impure and papistical, which certain of our brethren often charged them with being; but whereas they were in their own nature indifferent, and either ordained or allowed by godly fathers for the edification of our people, we notwithstanding chose rather to lay them aside than to offend the minds or alienate the affections of the brethren.  We retain however the remainder of the form of prayer and of the administration of the sacraments, which is prescribed in our book, and this with the consent of almost the whole church, the judgment of which in matters of this sort we did not think should be disregarded.  With the consent likewise of the same church there was forthwith appointed one pastor, two preachers, four elders, two deacons; the greatest care being taken that every one should be at perfect liberty to vote as he pleased; except only that by the command of the magistrate, before the election took place, were set forth those articles lately published by the authority of king Edward, which contained a summary of our doctrine, and which we were all of us required to subscribe.  For what kind of an election, they said, must be expected, unless the voters shall previously have agreed as to doctrine?  Certain parties, who had before manifested some objection, subscribed to these articles of their own accord.  Some few declined doing so, of whose peaceableness nevertheless we entertain good hope.
    We have thought fit to write thus fully to your kindness, that you might ascertain the whole course of our proceedings from ourselves.  Our liturgy is translated into French, and the articles above mentioned have very lately been printed at Zurich.  Did we not suppose that they would easily be met with among you, we should take care that copies should be forwarded you.  But we pray your kindness not to imagine that we have aimed at any thing else throughout this whole business, and this we testify before the Lord, than the purification of our church, and the avoiding of most grievous stumbling-blocks which otherwise seemed to be hanging over us.  May the Lord Jesus very long preserve your piety to us and to his church!  Farewell.  Frankfort, April 5, [1555.]
          Your piety’s most devoted
                English exiles,
        RICHARD COX.    
        DAVID WHITEHEAD.  
        RICHARD ALVERY. 
        THOMAS BECON.   
        EDWIN SANDYS.   
        EDMUND GRINDAL.
        JOHN BALE.
        ROB. HORN.
        THO. LEVER.
        THO. SAMPSON.

  LETTER CCCLVIII. DAVID WHITEHEAD AND OTHERS TO JOHN CALVIN.
  Frankfort
  Sept. 20, 1555
    As we were awaiting the arrival of certain of our brethren, to whom your letter seemed especially to apply, we were prevented from answering it, most learned Calvin, so early as either the case itself required, or as you probably expected.  But now, since all hope of their coming to us is taken away, it has seemed good to us who are here, to make at length some reply; partly indeed, lest by our silence we should seem unmindful of our duty to you, and partly, lest we should seem to betray our excellent cause.  And, first, we desire you to be fully persuaded of this, that we regard you with entire veneration and love, both by reason of your singular godliness, and also of your especial preeminence in the most valuable attainments.  But we consider it as a matter of exceeding regret, that our late letter was not altogether satisfactory to you in removing all your scruples.  This, however, we must ascribe to those parties to whom you appeared to be a fit object for them to endeavor to deceive, and one whose authority they might shamelessly abuse for the purpose of disturbing our church.  For it seems very evident to us, that they would never have ventured to raise such a disturbance, had you not refrained in that letter of yours from pouring as it were cold water on the flame.  Your letter was to them like the club of Hercules, by which they easily believed that they could beat down all their opponents.  And, indeed, your name ought deservedly to have influence both with us, and with all godly persons.  But if you had been well acquainted with their devices, if you had been sufficiently aware of their boldness and wicked designs, we have no doubt but that you would never have suffered them to come near you, much less to impose upon you as it were in so barefaced a manner.  Indeed we consider it impossible to entertain any doubt of your candor and impartiality, as soon as our case shall have been clearly made known to you, and their artifices exposed.  But though your letter is not a little annoying to us, inasmuch as it seems to brand us and bring us in guilty of such great offences, yet we hope that you have another ear in reserve for our reply.  Receive, therefore, thee few remarks in answer to your letter.
    These friends of yours complain that “we are too precise in enforcing the English ceremonies, and unreasonably partial to our own country.”  These, indeed, we pertinaciously retain, as knowing them to be very godly: this, however, has never been done by us in a precise manner; for we have abandoned some of them for the sake of your friends, which might at that time have been piously adopted.  But we make this concession to the love of our country, to which, forsooth, we are too much inclined.  These, your friends, however, are altogether a disgrace to their country; for whatever has been bestowed from above upon our country in this respect, with exceeding arrogance, not to say impudence, they are treading under foot.  You must know that we do not entertain any regard for our country which is not agreeable to God’s holy word.  Neither in the mean while are we so ungrateful to our country, nor have we so cast off every feeling of humanity, as rashly to despise the benefits which God has bestowed upon it.  Nor have we such a mean opinion of the judgments of our countrymen, who resisted ungodliness even unto blood, as that by reason of the clamors of individuals, possessing no weight whatever, we should brand them with the foulest marks of papistical impiety.  You “heard the reasons which would not allow us to depart from the received form.”  You heard them, indeed, but not from us, and probably not all of them.  And, indeed, we have very little doubt but that you would easily refute them: but we are confident that the best reasons of our conduct will stand good before the judgment-seat of God.  You say that “it offended you that there was no concession or relaxation made to them on our parts.”  And you might justly have been offended, had no concession been made.  But as this is a barefaced and impudent falsehood of theirs, you can judge for yourself in what light they must have regarded you.  You object to us “lights and crosses.”  As for lights, we never had any; and with respect to crosses, if we ever made use of them, these friends of yours have not imposed upon you.  But consider again in what estimation they must have held you, when they presumed to assault you with so many manifest falsehoods.  They also falsely lay it to our charge before you, that we wished to “burden the church with trifling and unprofitable ceremonies.”  Our ceremonies are very few, and all of them of no little use towards the advancement of godliness.  But it is no wonder that our ceremonies appear redundant, and even burdensome, to those persons who exclaim against the public reading of the word of God as an irksome and unprofitable form.  But from those words of yours it is quite evident, that you are entirely ignorant of almost all the circumstances of our case.  For we have nothing, we are well assured, which either in your judgment, or in that of any godly man, will appear to be either unprofitable or injurious.  But you are right in restraining yourself; or you would otherwise, as the mountebanks do, fight to no purpose against things which have no existence.  We are quite ready to give you an account of the ceremonies we make use of here, whenever you please; we have more reason, we think, to apprehend the dissatisfaction of many persons by reason of their fewness rather than of their number.
    To return now to the other points of your letter.  “All good men,” you say, “will allow the pastors and other ministers to be elected by the common voice, so that others do not complain that a part of the church has been oppressed fraudulently and with crafty practices.”  This assertion is certainly a stinging one, and would have wounded us severely, had not its point been blunted when it fell upon us.  Nay, we allow it to be a thunderbolt; but it has not reached the object at which it was aimed.  It is neither a novelty to us, nor a matter of surprise, that men, conscious of being in the wrong, will at length proceed to assert what is untrue.  But it certainly turned out contrary to all our expectation, that you should so lend your ears to them, as to incline in some measure to that party.  For what kind of an election ours was, we call to witness God, our conscience, our whole church, and the very magistrates themselves, of whose authority and advice we always availed ourselves.  But we will explain to you at another time, if we are compelled to do so, the means by which others have attempted to undermine the church, and consequently to overthrow it; what indirect artifices they have made use of, and by what turbulent proceedings they have labored after their own exaltation; and also, what a heavy charge that is which you seem to insinuate, that we have abused the lenity of the magistracy. We wish, however, that those persons who are filling your ears with these calumnious and slanderous accusations, had never abused our lenity, the kindness of the magistrates, and your authority, which has given them no small encouragement to stir up this controversy.  God forbid that we should abuse any persons whatever, much less those excellent magistrates who have deserved so well of us.  But if you could bring your mind to believe that we were so lost to shame, how could you possibly think that the magistrates, discreet and worthy men as they are, would either be so stupid in regard to our cause, as not to find out our trickeries, or that they would suffer them, when detected, to go unpunished, and even regard us with greater kindness than before?  In detecting the artifices of your friends, which, nevertheless, they knew how to devise and manage with much more ingenuity than we do, they were of such quick scent, that they immediately smelt them out, and their opinion of them is no secret.
    But leaving these things, let us return to the business of Knox, wherein you greatly desire godliness and brotherly love on the part of those who were implicated in it.  We will, therefore, briefly and truly explain to you the history of the whole affair.  There were, at that time, certain parties in our church, who, instructed by long practice and experience, were able easily to foresee and conceive before hand in their minds the evils that were either already impending over our church, or might happen to it in future.  These persons understood that Knox had published a certain book, which they perceived would supply their enemies with just ground for overturning the whole church.  For there were interspersed in this publication atrocious and horrible calumnies against the queen of England, whom Knox called at one time the wicked Mary, at another time a monster.  And he exasperated king Philip also by language not much less violent.  When these men had read this infamous libel, attached as they are to true religion and to our church, they considered it neither profitable nor safe to ourselves that Knox should be received with favor by our church.  One of them, therefore, called upon the intimate friends of Knox, and pointed out to him that it would be most advisable for Knox to leave the church, and depart to some other place; and this he earnestly recommended him to do.  Not succeeding in this, our friends, having more closely considered the danger which without doubt was hanging over them, thought it right to proceed in a different way.  The matter was at last brought before the magistrates, with no other view than that Knox might be ordered to quit the place.  When the magistrate was made acquainted with the case, and had also discovered that the emperor was defamed in that pamphlet; considering that a man of this kind might easily occasion danger, not only to our church, but also to his state, he ordered him to leave the city.
    Thus you have the whole affair as it really took place; nor would we for the sake of our friends evade the subject, by holding back any thing, or obscure it by our relation of it.  Something was conceded to Knox.  For our party had observed some other things in him, which we have not purposely forborne to mention, but which induced them to desire his departure.  But these clearly were the reasons which drove our friends to this step, and it was altogether in this way that they got rid of that affair.  But what an occasion for disseminating falsehoods these authors of confusion thence laid hold of, what dreadful language they uttered, what disturbance they excited, must be matter of wonder to every one who is unacquainted with their character: especially when they even prevailed upon you to write concerning men who were in every respect innocent, that “it had been better for them to have remained in their own country, than to have brought over to a distant land the firebrand of unjust severity.”  If those who occasioned Knox’s departure from hence had been in any way known to you, you would assuredly have dealt more gently with them.  For scarce any man living is more remote from cruelty than, by the grace of God, those persons both are and have been.  Certainly, when an account of what they had done was demanded of them by our pastor, they gave such a straightforward statement, that, scrupulous as he is in every thing else, he had nothing whatever to find fault with.  For you cannot but be aware, how unbecoming it would have been in us impotently to rage in half-muttered abuse against magistrates; not, perhaps, because they do not deserve it, but because of the office imposed upon them by God.  This we can assure you, that that outrageous pamphlet of Knox’s added much oil to the flame of persecution in England.  For before the publication of that book, not one of our brethren had suffered death: but as soon as it came forth, we doubt not but that you are well aware of the number of excellent men who have perished in the flames; to say nothing of how many other godly men besides have been exposed to the risk of all their property, and even life itself, upon the sole ground of either having had this book in their possession, or having read it; who were perhaps rescued from the sword at greater cost and danger of life than the others offered their necks to it.  But enough of these things.
    You piously exhort us that, if we perceive that the minds of some parties are wounded not without cause, we should endeavor to make amends for the injury.  But when you have left no stone unturned to heal those persons who have inflicted their wounds upon themselves, and have nevertheless lost all your pains, what can you possibly do for them?  Yu say that you have “diligently admonished those who are minded to leave us, that their departure should not rend asunder the agreement of the brethren.”  We wish that your wisdom had foreseen this, and that the authority of your letter had not given encouragement to the former quarrel, before you had heard the other side of the question.  We wish that your sagacity had anticipated what was the tendency of their designs, namely, to open faction, to say nothing more.  For they themselves now presume to write that they are ready to maintain the lawfulness of their secession from our church.  We certainly hoped, indeed, when we wrote to you, that our reconciliation would have been lasting; and your friend Whittingham, with all the rest of his party, except three or four, had given in his adhesion to our church.  But oh! like true Proteuses, they now make subterfuges, and shamefully desert us, under I know not what pretence.  We know not whence this change of sentiment has arisen; but we leave you to judge what opinion must be entertained of those persons who tell you that they leave the church solely on account of ceremonies which even they themselves dare no longer affirm to be ungodly, or can prove to be at variance with the word of God, or in any way unprofitable.  We pray God to bestow upon them a better mind; and we earnestly entreat you no longer to mix yourself up in so hateful a business, lest some disparagement should arise to your reputation, which we desire should at all times be most honorable and holy.  May the Lord Jesus preserve you as an especial ornament to his church!
    Frankfort, Sept. 20, 1555.
              Your admirers,
        DAVID WHITEHEAD, Pastor.  
        RICHARD ALVEY.
        RICHARD COX.      
        HENRY PARRY.
        THOMAS BECON, Minister of BARTH. THRAHERON.
          the Word of God.    
          THOMAS COTTISFORD.

  LETTER CCCLIX. DAVID WHITEHEAD AND OTHERS TO HENRY BULLINGER.
  Frankfort
  Sept. 17, 1557
    Health in Christ Jesus.  Others inscribe the monuments of their genius to men of rank, by whose authority they may obtain protection, or by whose wealth they may become enriched; but you, most learned and most excellent sir, consecrate your most godly studies to the miserable and afflicted churches of the exiles, from whom no human support or worldly advantage can be expected.  In this truly you have followed the rule of perfect charity, which seeks not her own, but the things of others.  For you have not sought for any benefit to yourself, but the comfort of the churches groaning under the cross; placing your hand as it were under the burden, and partaking and sympathizing in our calamities.  And this purpose of your most compassionate mind you have, as far as we can judge from ourselves, most abundantly accomplished.  For having been introduced through the door opened by you into the revelation of the Lord concerning his churches, as if to behold an object immediately present before our eyes, we have derived indeed very much comfort, both from the will of Almighty God, by whose permission and allowance these things are taking place, and also from this your kindness and favor, whom we regard as a messenger of God to us.  For which your deservings towards us, as you in no wise expect any return from us, so we are unable to afford any other, except that (as is the duty of men who are not ungrateful) we return you our most hearty thanks to the utmost of our power, and will in the mean time entreat God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ in our earnest and constant prayers, that he may be pleased evermore to defend and preserve to his flock such a pastor, and to his afflicted church such a comforter.  Dated at Frankfort, Sept. 17, 1557.  Your piety’s most devoted, the minister, elders, and deacons of the church of the English exiles at Frankfort on the Maine.
      DAVID WHITEHEAD.    
      JOHN HALES.
      JOHN WILFORD.     
      WILLIAM MASTER.
      THOMAS SOWERBY.   
      GREGORY RAILTON.
      JO. TAVERNER.     
      EDMUND SUTTON.

  LETTER CCCLX. WILLIAM WHITTINGHAM TO JOHN CALVIN.
  Frankfort
  March 25, 1555
    The occasion that ought to bring us the greatest comfort from your most important letter, has in a manner thrown us into the greatest anxiety and distress.  For when there seemed likely to be no end to such noisy contentions, and on that account it was ordered by the magistrate that we should comply with all the rites of the French church, (unless there should happen to be any thing that might justly be found fault with;) this circumstance so much offended some parties, that, leaving the contest about ceremonies, they betook themselves to forensic accusations.  For master Knox, being most unjustly charged before the magistrate with high treason, has been ordered to quit the place, not without the regret of all good men, and even of the magistrate himself.  He is, therefore, on his way to you, and will explain the whole matter in order.  This only I can speak from experience, that nothing ever occasioned greater distress and shame to good men, than this wickedness has done.  But I cannot now relate these things by reason of my grief, and he will himself explain them better and more fully in person, as well as all other matters, of which I will describe the progress and result more at length after the fair.  Farewell in Christ, and with your wonted affection aid us by your prayers and counsel.  Frankfort, March 25, 1555.
          WILL. WHITTINGHAM.

  LETTER CCLXI. WILLIAM WHITTINGHAM TO JOHN CALVIN.
  Frankfort
  Sept. 21, 1555
    Supposing that this letter will scarcely reach you much sooner than I shall arrive myself, I do not write so fully as the subject itself requires, and as I could wish.  For I have sent off all my baggage, and am hastening to you as speedily as possible.  With respect to those who are at Basle, we are in hopes, that, after a mutual conference, they together with us will both enjoy your valuable assistance, and not only rejoice in that divine benefit, but will embrace and cherish it.  I shall very soon, I hope, converse with you in person about your letter to our friends, and our own departure, and other matters.  Master St. Andrew has zealously conducted himself here, and to the great and common benefit of the churches.  Master John à Glauberg has made honorable mention of you, as he ought to do, and requests me to salute you most diligently in his name, as, being at this time especially engaged in a multitude of affairs, he is unable to write to you.  All our friends salute you, reverence, and most deservedly esteem you.  May Almighty God very long preserve you, both to his own glory, and the common comfort both of ourselves and all others!  Frankfort, Sept. 21.
            Your disciple,
              WHITTINGHAM.

  LETTER CCCLXII. JOHN FOXE TO BONIFACE AMERBACH.
  Basle
  Nov. 25, 1556
    Health with much peace in Christ!  The book of common places inscribed to the young men of you university, as I was unable to present it to them individually, I send and deposit, most honorable lord rector, and ornament of the university, with you in the name of the whole body: not that it contains any thing worthy of you, or adapted to their use, but that there might exist some memorial of my regard towards them.  I should not dare request you to receive it with courtesy and kindness, much less to honor it with your patronage, were not the subject itself deserving of it.  But, as there is scarcely any thing of this sort in the common affairs of life, however useful it may be of itself, which does not require some patron or other, how much greater occasion have I for the aid of your patronage in the present instance; which if you will grant me, you will perform an act, if not suited to my labors, at least worthy of your own kindness.  Basle, Nov. 25, 1556.
            Yours in Christ,
                  J. FOXE.

  LETTER CCCLXIII. CHRISTOPHER GOODMAN TO PETER MARTYR.
  Geneva
  Aug. 20, 1558
    How dear I have ever been to you, my honored master, I have more frequently and happily experienced in the fact itself, than I could now, if I had leisure to do so, express in writing.  And, what has been very gratifying to me, I abundantly perceived from your last letter, which I received about the end of June, that it would not be your fault if I did not continue in the same degree of favor with you.  Wherefore if on this account the letter of so insignificant an individual as myself has been so acceptable to you, yours on the other hand cannot but be most acceptable.  For though I greatly desired to have your opinion, which in that business would have been equivalent to that of many others, yet I acknowledge your paternal regard for me, and appreciate it as I ought to do.  But it does not become me to conceal from your piety what displeased me.  I know indeed that I have your free permission to enter on this subject, in such a way however that, whatever it be, it may be submitted to your paternal correction and judgment, as it is right it should be.  First of all then, it has always been my opinion that we should aim at nothing with greater earnestness than the defense of truth, whatever the controversy may be, or by whomsoever it may be taken up; whether they stand on our side as friends, or against us as avowed opponents; provided only all rashness and bitterness of spirit be removed.  And as the never sufficiently admired sentiment of a heathen writer leads us to this, when in matters of secular interest he prefers truth to his dearest friends, and men of most honorable character; how should we be led to desire it in sacred learning, where its majesty and authority are most conspicuous!  And as it is right never to spare our most bitter enemies the papists, so also according to our ability should we remove the ignorance of our brethren.  This is the case whenever the truth, openly brought forth by the diligence and authority of learned men, is made manifest to the contemplation of all.  I know indeed that such persons will always incur the dislike of many, and sometimes too that of their friends: but since it has ever been the property of truth to be viewed with hatred by the generality, such persons are to be regarded, in my opinion, with greater praise, in proportion as they have more frequently endured the opposition of men; because truth should never be left destitute of its proper support, and exposed to the reproaches of the wicked.  Then it very often comes to pass in practice, that when we seek to benefit either party by our silence, we benefit neither; God so ordering all things, to whom due obedience is not rendered as often as entire respect is not paid to truth: forasmuch as in the cause of religion, as you know, no third party is allowed, but we are required therein always to be either hot or cold, and must either gather or scatter; provided only that in our proceedings moderation and charity may be preserved between brethren as far as possible.
    For which reason, as I deny not that I had much to regret in that Frankfort controversy; so indeed, though it occasioned me great uneasiness in common with the rest, I do not now repent of having stood forth and labored with others in that cause, which has been the chief occasion of that happy agreement and solid peace which by the great blessing of God we enjoy in this place: which I persuade myself never would have occurred, if for the sake of the other party it had been permitted to contaminate the purity of religion with the dregs of popery which they wished to force upon us.  For by such conduct we should deservedly have been called traitors to the truth, and that too against our own convictions; and those who have so pertinaciously endeavored to load the free consciences of the brethren with unprofitable ceremonies and paltry ordinances of man, would not so readily have been brought to an acknowledgement of their offense.  If Paul and Barnabas had given place to the brethren who came from Jerusalem to Antioch, and had not withstood the doctrine of those persons with all their might, what a pestilence would have spread throughout all the churches!  And if Peter, James, and the rest had refused to deliver their opinion to Paul and Barnabas when they asked for it, how would they themselves have been otherwise than cruel to the brethren, and faithless before God?  They thought fit therefore so to condescend to the infirmity of their brethren, as yet meanwhile not to withhold their sentiments on the side of truth.  And as to the contention which then seemed evil and calamitous, it was shortly afterwards evident how necessary it was to those churches, and useful to us who come after them.  Since therefore they are set before us as an example in those things which relate to God, we may safely imitate them; not only that we may boldly contend for the truth, whether it be against open enemies, or against those who wish to be called brethren; but also that we may not refuse our support, whenever it is demanded with simplicity and for the sake of arriving at the truth.  And though in this case it may be difficult to avoid the imputation of being contentious, yet when our conscience bears witness to us that we are averse from strife, and that we do not regard the opinions of men, but the cause of the contention itself, we must faithfully discharge our duty, and leave the event to Almighty God, who will defend his own cause.
    I do not write thus as not having received your so friendly reply with a feeling of kindness, nor as presuming to dictate, especially to your prudence, which I venerate, what I think ought to be done; for I well know how incompetent I am for this office, and how greatly I need an adviser myself.  Neither do I write with a view of extorting from you the opinion for which I asked, though I greatly desired it, as I still continue to do: but as, whether it had been in my favor or the contrary, it would have been most gratifying and profitable, (for your sanction would not so much have confirmed me in that opinion, as your dissent, had it existed, would have recalled me to a more careful examination of the subject;) so I only proposed to your consideration what seemed to me proper to be done in this business, not taking the decision upon myself, but leaving it, as I ought, to you alone.  I requested the judgment of master Calvin, to which you very properly attach much weight, before the book was published, and I showed him the same propositions which I sent to you.  And though he deemed them somewhat harsh, especially to those who are in the place of power, and that for this reason they should be handled with caution, yet he nevertheless admitted them to be true.
    There is no news here but what I think you must be acquainted with: for I know that you have received information of what has happened to the church of your countrymen among us, and especially concerning our friend Silvester, for whose case I grieve not a little; not because I do not hope well of him, but because he has given occasion for being deservedly suspected of so awful an heresy.  I pray God speedily to purge his church from such a pestilence, and entirely to deliver our friend Silvester, altogether restored to us, from the suspicion under which he is still laboring.
    Master Whittingham salutes you, and heartily thanks you for your kind mention of him in your letter.  Salute, I pray you, in my name Julius and his wife, Jewel, Parkhurst and his wife, Aylmer, Frensham, and Ulmis.  May the Lord Jesus evermore strengthen you by his Sprit, and very long preserve you in safety for the benefit of his church!  Geneva, Aug. 20, 1558.
          Your disciple,
              CHRISTOPHER GOODMAN.

  ACCOUNT OF CERTAIN ENGLISH MARTYRS.
  unknown
  1555
  background: extract from an anonymous letter.
    1.  John Hooper, Rowland Taylor, John Rogers, Laurence Saunders, John Bradford, true ministers of God, in whom with the constant preaching of the word was also united a godly innocence of life illustrating the same, were on account of evangelical truth boldly asserted by their lips, as it was truly believed in their hearts, condemned to the flames.  Hooper at Gloucester, Taylor at Hadleigh in Suffolk, Rogers at London, Saunders at Coventry, Bradford at Manchester in the county of Lancaster, were committed by their cruel tyrants to be burned at the stake on the last day of February; and these most innocent lambs of God, thus led to the slaughter, could neither be subdued by threatenings, nor softened by blandishments, so as not to confirm with their blood the doctrine of Christ, which they had truly professed before both by their living and preaching.  For they chose rather to refuse the Queen’s pardon, which was repeatedly offered them, and set before them too in the very juncture of their undergoing martyrdom, than deny their profession of the truth.  Wherefore, having manfully and resolutely rejected a pardon, and setting life itself at nought, having first exhorted others to embrace the truth, they thus most victoriously completed their warfare.
    2.  The magistrate to whom Saunders was given in charge, and who was ordered to put him to the torture, was so moved by the integrity and constancy of the man, that he could not execute with a safe conscience so tyrannical a command of the queen, neither would he do so.  He was therefore accused, arrested, and committed to prison.
    3.  Thomas Rose, who has now been for many years a constant preacher of the gospel, having secretly assembled some brethren on the first of January, administered to them in a godly manner, and according to Christ’s institution, the supper of the Lord, preceded by a sermon, in which because he prayed for the conversion of the queen in this way, either that God would soon convert her, or remove her yoke from the necks of the godly, he was adjudged a traitor by the bishop of Winchester, as guilty of treason, and is kept in prison with all who communicated with him, twenty-eight in number, who are all of them condemned to the flames, unless perhaps the above-named Rose be forced to undergo that more cruel kind of death usually awarded to traitors.
    4.  Two godly virgins, and one sober matron, behaved themselves in the presence of their tyrants with so much modesty, holiness, religion, and firmness in the cause of the gospel, that they were regarded with admiration by all good men; but our tyrants thought proper to condemn them to the flames.
    5.  The queen has issued a proclamation for the apprehension and punishment of heretics, according to the statute ex officio, as the canonists call it; and for the examination of books of suspected doctrine (as they call it), that the parties, with whom they may be found, shall either be punished capitally, if they choose to disown their contents, or condemned to the flames, if they think fit to defend them.
    6.  The emperor and his sister are at Antwerp with three thousand troops; for what purpose, or with what intent, is unknown.

  THE COUNCIL AND OFFICERS FOR 1846-7.
  unknown
  1846
    President: THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORD ASHLEY, M.P.
    Treasurer: SIR WALTER R. FARQUHAR, BART.
    Council: REV. R. G. BAKER—REV. C. BENSON, Canon of Worcester. REV. E. BICKERSTETH. JOHN BRIDGES, ESQ. JOHN BRUCE, ESQ. REV. GUY BRYAN. REV. RICHARD BURGESS. REV. T. TOWNSON CHURTON, Fellow of Brasenose College, Oxford. HON. WILLIAM COWPER. REVE. W. H. COX, Vice Principal, St. Mary Hall, Oxford. REV. J. W. CUNNINGHAM. REV. THOMAS DALE, Canon Residentiary of St. Paul’s. VEN. DR. DEALTRY, Archdeacon of Surrey. REV. W. GOODE. REV. JOHN HARDING—REV. EDWARD HOARE. REV. T. H. HORNE, Canon of St. Paul’s. JOSEPH HOARE, ESQ. HON. ARTHUR KINNAIRD. HON. and REV. B. W. NOEL—HENRY POWNALL, ESQ. REV. JOSIAH PRATT. REV. M. M. PRESTON. REV. DANIEL WILDON.
    General Secretary and Librarian: REV. JOHN AYRE.
     Editorial Secretary: REV. JAMES SCHOLEFIELD, Regius Professor of Greek in the University of Cambridge.
    Secretary for General Business: WILLIAM THOMAS, ESQ. at the Office of the Parker Society, 33, Southampton St. Strand, London.
    Auditors: HON. A. KINNAIRD, REV. R. E. HANKINSON, H. POWNALL, ESQ., & F. LOWE, ESQ.
    Bankers: MESSRS. HERRIES, FARQUHAR, AND CO, No 16, St. James’s Street.

  REGULATIONS FOR DELIVERYOF THE BOOKS PUBLISHED BYTHE SOCIETY.
  unknown
  unknown
    I. They will be delivered, free of expense, at the Office, or within three miles of the General Post Office, London.
    II. They will be sent to any place in England beyond the distance of three miles from the General Post Office, by any conveyance a Member may point out.  In this case the parcels will be booked at the expense of the Society, but the carriage must be paid by the Members to whom they are sent.
    III. They will be delivered, free of expense, at any place in London which a Member, resident in the country, may name.
    IV. They may remain at the Office of the Society until the Members apply for them, but in that case, the Society will not be responsible for any damage which may happen from fire, or other accident.
    V.  They will be sent to any of the Correspondents, or Agents of the Society, each Member paying the Correspondent or Agent a share of the carriage of the parcel in which the books were included.  Arrangements are made for the delivery on this plan, in many of the cities and large towns where a sufficient number of Members reside; and it will be esteemed a favor if gentlemen who are willing to further the objects of the Parker Society, by taking charge of the books for the Members in their respective neighborhoods, will write to the Office on the subject.
    VI. They will be delivered in Edinburgh and Dublin as in London, and forwarded from thence to Members in other parts of Scotland and Ireland, in the same manner as is mentioned above with respect to England.

  A LIST OF THE WORKS ALREADY PUBLISHED BY THE PARKER SOCIETY.
  unknown
  unknown
    FOR THE YEAR 1841:
    The Works of Bishop Ridley.
    The Sermons and other Pieces of Archbishop Sandys.
    The Works of Bishop Pilkington.
    The Works of Roger Hutchinson.
    FOR THE YEAR 1842:
    The Examinations and Writings of Archdeacon Philpot.
    Christian Prayers and Meditations.
    Letters of Bishop Jewel, and others, translated from the Originals in the Archives of Zurich
    (1st Series).
    The Writings of Archbishop Grindal.
    Early Writings of the Rev. T. Becon, Chaplain to Archbishop Cranmer, and Prebendary of
    Canterbury.
    FOR THE YEAR 1843:
    Fulke’s Defense of the English Translation of the Bible.
    Early Writings of Bishop Hooper.
    Writings of Archbishop Cranmer on the Lord’s Supper.
    The Catechism and other pieces of Becon.
    FOR THE YEAR 1844:
    The Liturgies, Primer and Catechism of the Reign of Edward VI.
    Writings of Bishop Coverdale.
    Sermons of Bishop Latimer.
    The Flower of Godly Prayers, and other Pieces of Becon.
    FOR THE YEAR 1845:
    Second Series of Letters from the Archives of Zurich.
    Remains of Bishop Latimer.
    Writings of Bishop Jewel.
    Devotional Poetry of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
    FOR THE YEAR 1846:
    Remaining Portion of Bishop Coverdale’s Writings.
    Original Letters relative to the Reformation.
    Remains of Archbishop Cranmer.
    Calfhill’s answer to Martiall’s Treatise on the Cross.
    FOR THE YEAR 1847:
    It is hoped that four of the following volumes will be returned.
  A further Portion of Bishop Jewel’s Works, including the latter part of his Answer to Harding, his Exposition on the Epistles to the Thessalonians, and other Pieces. Liturgies and Occasional Services of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. The concluding Portion of the Original Letters relative to the Reformation. Together with either a vol. of the Writings of John Bradford, or a vol. of the Works of Tyndale, or one of the other Works most forward in preparation.

LIST OF WORKS ALREADYPUBLISHED AND UNDER CONSIDERATION OF THE PARKER SOCIETY.
unknown
unknow
  In Royal Octavo. Becon*--Cranmer*--Jewel*--Whitgift—Parker—Bullinger’s Decades— Alley—Whittaker.
  In Demy Octavo. Ridley*--Pilkington*--Philpot*--Fulke*--Nowell—Coverdale*--Curtis—Bale—Tyndale—Frith—Barns—Sandys*--Hutchinson*--Grindal*--Hooper*--Latimer*--Bradford—Cooper—Fox—Taverner, Rogers on the Articles, Calfhill,* and some others; Royal Authors, Documents of the Reign of Edward VI.*--Documents relative to the Reign of Mary—Documents of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth—Zurich Letters (three series)*--Letters and Documents from Archbishop Parker’s MSS. in C.C.C.C.  Occasional Services of Queen Elizabeth’s Reigh*--The Homilies—Some Volumes of Sermons preached before Edward VI. and Queen Elizabeth, at St. Paul’s Cross, in the Universities, and on various occasions—Several volumes of Tracts and small Pieces— Various Letters and Documents—Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum—Queen Elizabeth’s Prayer Book—Devotional Poetry of the Sixteenth Century*--Christian Meditations and Prayers*, and some other Devotional Manuals.
      It is calculated that the Works above stated may be included in about 18 or 20 volumes, royal octavo, and 50 volumes demy, and that the whole may be completed in sixteen years from the commencement.  A few pieces of peculiar interest may probably be printed in fac similes, and these will be in the size of the originals.  The list, however, is not to be considered as definitely settled.  It is not possible to state the order in which the volumes will appear, but each will, as far as possible, be complete in itself.  The whole series (fully equal to a hundred volumes of demy octavo), when completed, will have cost the original subscribes only about sixteen pounds, paid in as many years, and in proportion for parts of the series.
    The Parker Society is also engaged in a complete examination of the State Paper Office, and is under engagement to print the Letters and Documents from that Repository in a separate form, by the express desire of Her Majesty’s Government.
    footnote: The Works of the Authors to whose name this mark (*) is appended, have been already printed, in whole or in part, and delivered to the Subscribers.
    All correspondence respecting Subscriptions, or delivery of the Books, is to be addressed to WILLIAM THOMAS, ESQ., Secretary for General Business, To whom all Bank and Post Office Orders are to be made payable, AT THE OFFICE OF THE PARKERah SOCIETY, 33, SOUTHAMPTON STREET, STAND, LONDON.

LETTER CCCXV. J. Tillison to Dr. Sancroft. The great desolation of the City.
unknown
September 14 1665.  
  REVEREND SIR,
  We are in good hopes that God in his mercy will put a stop to this sad calamity of Sickness; but the desolation of the City is very great.  That heart is either steel or stone that will not lament this sad Visitation, and will not bleed for those unutterable sorrows.
  It is a time, God knows, that one woe courts another; those that are sick are in extreme sorrow; the poor are in need; those that are in health are in fear of infection on the one side, and the wicked inventions of hellish rebellious spirits to put us in an uproar on the other side.
  What eye would not weep to see so many habitations uninhabited; the poor sick not visited; the hungry not fed; the Grave not satisfied!  Death stares us continually in the face in every infected person that passeth by us; in every coffin which is daily and hourly carried along the streets.  The bells never cease to put us in mind of our mortality.
  The custom was, in the beginning, to bury the dead in the night only; now, both night and day will hardly be time enough to do it.
  For the last week, mortality did too apparently evidence that, that the dead was piled in heaps above ground for some hours together, before either time could be gained or place to bury them in.
  The Quakers (as we are informed) have buried in their piece of ground a thousand for some weeks together last past.
  Many are dead in Ludgate, Newgate, and Christ Church Hospital, and many other places about the town which are not included in the bill of mortality.
  The disease itself (as is acknowledged by our practitioners in physic) was more favorable in the beginning of the contagion; now more fierce and violent; and they themselves do likewise confess to stand amazed to meet with so many various symptoms which they find amongst their patients.  One week the general distempers are botches and boils; the next week as clear-skinned as may be; but death spares neither.  One week, full of spots and tokens; and perhaps the succeeding, none at all.  Now taken with a vomiting and looseness, and within two or three days almost a general raging madness.  One while patients used to linger four or five days, at other times not forty-eight hours; and at this very time we find it more quick than ever it was.  Many are sick, and few escape.  Where it has had its fling, there it decreases; where it has not been long, there it increases.  It reigned most heretofore in alleys, &c. now it domineers in the open streets.  The poorer sort was most afflicted; now the richer bear a share.
  Captain Colchester is dead.  Fleetham and all his family are clearly swept away, except one maid.  Dr. Burnett, Dr. Glover, and one or two more of the College of Physicians, with Dr. O’Dowd, which was licensed by my Lord’s Grace of Canterbury, some surgeons, apothecaries, and Johnson the chemist, died all very suddenly.  Some say (but God forbid that I should report it for truth) that these, in a consultation together, if not all, yet the greatest part of them, attempted to open a dead corpse which was full of the tokens; and being in hand with the dissected body, some fell down dead immediately, and others did not outlive the next day at noon.
  All is well and in safety at your house, God be thanked.  Upon Tuesday last I made it my day’s work to kindle fires in every room of the house where I could do it, and aired all the bedclothes and bedding at the fires, and so let them all lie abroad until this morning; the feather bed in the back chamber was almost spoiled with the heavy weight of carpets and other things upon it.  I am afraid I have been too tedious, and therefore beg your pardon and take my leave, who am,
      Reverend Sir,
    your most faithful humble servant,
          JO. TILLISON.
  Brimstone, hops, pepper, and frankincense, &c. I use to fume the rooms with. For yourself.

LETTER CCCXCV. The Duke of Queensberry to Queen Anne; again upon the Act of Security.  A Plot to overturn the Government discovered.
Queensberry
August 11, 1703.
  May it please your Majesty,
  I have sent full accounts to Mr. Nairne of the proceedings of your Parliament, to lay before your Majesty, and am very sorry that I am never able to give your Majesty better news from it.
  It is very uneasy to me, and cannot be pleasant to your Majesty, that I always complain of your own servants, and especially my Lord Privy Seal, who leaves me, and concurs in almost all the humorous votes which tend to jealousies and division betwixt your two Kingdoms.  We have had two votes lately, in which I presume your Majesty would have expected that I should have had the concurrence of those whom you are pleased to trust in your service.  The first was, whether the Officers of State should be left out of that Parliament, or meeting of Estates, which (long be it hence) should name the successor; and though it was fully and well argued, that they were essential Members of the Parliament, yet I could not prevail with my Lord Privy Seal to vote for us:  and next, this day a clause was brought in, ordaining the Kingdom to buy arms, and that the whole fencible men should be trained and exercised in arms, and the reason for this was very fairly given, that because what was done would certainly offend England; and therefore that this Kingdom ought to be put into a posture of defense.  It was as fairly argued by us, that to give an order or law for arming was both unseasonable, and undutiful to do any such thing during your Majesty’s reign, which might embroil business with England, and encourage the common enemy abroad; yet in this I could not prevail with my Lord Privy Seal to give us his vote; and some others of your Majesty’s servants made a very cold appearance; and it is hard that, though the plurality of the Parliament are very well inclined to your Majesty’s service, yet by the fault of ourselves (for I dare presume to say no worse) we are almost outdone in every thing.  Yet I still hope, in what concerns your Majesty, your servants will not encourage any encroachments to be made upon your prerogative; and that they will concur to obtain the less at last; but for the invasions that are to be made upon the Successor, though I have struggled all I can in every point, yet these will be crowded into this Act of Security, which was brought in by my Lord Privy Seal against my will, which I think will now be finished in a day or two.  I shall send it to your Majesty, that you may consider whether you will allow it to be touched, though I am afraid that I shall not be able to hinder them to tack it to the Supply Act.
  I presumed lately to acquaint your Majesty that I had seen some letters from a Gentleman come from France, in which he spoke with some assurance of overturning the Government here.  Since that time, those who received the letters asked liberty from me to meet with that Gentleman, that they might try if they could learn any thing that might be useful to your Majesty’s service, which I yielded to, and one of them had a long conference with him, of which I have given your Majesty an account in a memorial herewith transmitted, and I beg of your Majesty, that it may be kept as secret, and made known to as few, as may be.  I am not yet allowed to name the persons, but if your Majesty commands me I must obey.
  God knows whether the story be true or false, but my author is a man of that quality and integrity that I dare assure your Majesty there is neither mistake nor trick on his part; and this I must say further, that there are several points related in the Memorial, that are otherwise confirmed, for I have seen a letter to Brigadier Maitland from one of his officers, wherein he tells him that he had intelligence of a Highland hunting, where six hundred of the best of the Laird of Grant’s men were to be in arms, and the Duke of Hamilton, and the Marquis of Athol were to be there; this letter I have sent to Mr. Nairne.  Major General Buchan acknowledges that one Mackenzie was put into the Bastile before he came away, besides the total desertion of all the cavaliers, except my Lords Balcarras, Wigton, and Dunmore, at that instant when these last orders came from France, and their joining in all things contrary to the prerogative of the Crown, with the vote this day of arming of the Country, do mightily instruct this declaration; and it agrees pretty well with the advertisement Mr. Stanhope had about money to be sent hither; but whatever is in the matter, I thought it my duty to represent it to your Majesty.
  I must beg leave to know from your Majesty, if that person shall apply to me, and be willing to own what he has said, how I shall use him.  It is strange enough that in his circumstances he should have said so much, and it can hardly be expected that he will forfeit what he may expect from France, without getting some terms from your Majesty.
  I apprehended, at first, that any opposition I met with here, was no further intended than to force themselves into places, and though I value the honor of being in your Majesty’s favor and service at the highest rate, yet when I considered that the consequences would only be as to me, and that it would be of less importance to your Majesty, who served you, I had far more ease in my mind.  But now that I have too great ground to apprehend this opposition is supported in order to attack or shake your Majesty’s Government, I shall be ready to expose my life and fortune in your service, and though I may not be successful in the trust with which your Majesty has honored me here, yet I dare say, that I shall be found faithful, and that the failure has not been on my part, but for the want of assistance from your Majesty’s other servants; and at the worst I hope nothing shall be carried that concerns your Majesty immediately; and a supply for some years may put your Majesty in condition to retrieve what was not to be hindered by,
            Madam,
        Your Majesty’s most dutiful, most humble,
          and most obedient subject and servant.
  Holyrood House,
  August the 11th, 1703.

LETTER CCCXCVI. The Duke of Queensberry to the Queen, upon the Rising of the Parliament.  Again upon the supposed Plot.
unknown
Sept. 25, 1703
background: FROM THE DRAFT INDORSED IN THE DUKE’S HAND-WRITING, “Copy of my Letter to the Qn. Sept, the 25th, 1703.”
  May it please your Majesty,
  I stay here some days, that I may receive any orders your Majesty may be pleased to give, after the rising of the Parliament is known, which I expect may be on Sunday or Monday next, and I shall be ready to set out next morning.  In the mean time I have endeavored to confirm such members as have served your Majesty in the Parliament, and engage them to return in the same sentiments, and I found many so well satisfied with the touching of the Acts, that they were frank to have given the Sessions at the 12th of October, and so well pleased to see that your Majesty keeps matters on the foot of the Revolution, that I am sensible we should have been stronger in the Parliament in October than perhaps we can be thereafter; and I was once resolved to have asked your Majesty’s allowance for the Parliament to sit at, or about, the time to which it is adjourned, but I was afraid that your Majesty’s other servants would not concur with me; and I find that many of them are resolved to go to Court, and give out that they have invitations to attend your Majesty, which made me forbear to insist for the Parliament’s sitting two or three weeks in October.
  The President of the Session could not be well absent from the Session here, and my Lord Register’s health did not allow him to travel.  So I have with much difficulty prevailed with my Lord Stair to come along with me, because he knew all my management and the proceedings of Parliament, in which he served your Majesty very heartily and honestly.
  I am glad to observe that there is a great calm at present here; one sort of people are pleased, and the other have got no irritation, and they content themselves that the Session was not obtained.
  I have seen that person of whom I formerly made mention to your Majesty; he confirms all that he had said to these persons who had dealt betwixt us, and adds many things more; he says he was let into all the secrets of the correspondence of Scotsmen with St. Germains, and tells plainly that very many do correspond there.  I am bound to tell your Majesty (though I ought not to believe him) that he says, he saw a letter last winter, written by my Lord Tarbat to my Lord Middleton, bearing that he was made Secretary of State, and that in a short time the Duke of Queensberry was to be shifted out, so as he was to be sole Secretary, and would have all the management of Scots business in his hands, that to secure their friends there would be a General Indemnity past, and the North country and Highlands would be made all of a piece; that the Duke of Queensberry had received five thousand pounds from the family of Hanover; that my Lord Middleton said, he knew the Duke of Hamilton was capable to be bribed, but did not believe the Duke of Queensberry would have taken money; he declares that Mr. Ogilvie of Boyn had frequent correspondence, which he begun when he went over to France, about his marble (yet I must do this gentleman the right to tell your Majesty that he did behave himself fairly in the Parliament, and there was none of the Gentlemen who call themselves Cavaliers that did keep their words so well to me as he did); he declares that there were three letters written by the late Queen at St. Germains, whereof one was directed to the Duke of Hamilton as Earl of Arran, which was delivered by one Captain James Murray, the other was committed to the person himself to deliver to the Duke of Gordon, which he actually did before he had entered into any correspondence with me, and the third was directed to the Lord Murray now Marquis of Athol, which was not delivered when he began this correspondence, and that he found the way to be master of that letter before it was delivered, which he gave to me, and I have transmitted to your Majesty, without breaking the seal, which is clear the effigies of the King, your Majesty’s father.  this person is willing to come to London, and to give what accounts he knows, providing he may do it secretly, and he offers to return to France, and discover all the correspondence and designs, but says that if he falls under observation, or that he be discovered, he runs the risk to be broke on the wheel; he says what money is transmitted yet from France, is only for the use of some particular persons, and that it comes by bills to London, and brought hither in specie.
  I confess it is hard to think how one should know, or be ready to reveal so much, yet the delivering of that principal letter, and the showing his own commission under the hand and seal of the Prince of Wales, as King James the Eighth and Third, which he says was the first paper sealed with his new Seal, these do give credit to what else could not have been so well trusted; and he says that he has a commission as Major General from the French King which lies there, that it might give no offence, till once the forces designed were raised.  I thought it necessary to entertain him with some money till your Majesty do signify your further pleasure about him.
  The Marquis of Athol’s great failing in the Parliament, with this letter, made me once very doubtful whether I should give him out his patent as Duke, which your Majesty had commanded to be done; but the regard I have punctually to obey all your Majesty’s commands determined me to give it out, and now many who were witnesses of his actings in Parliament, and who know that he stands upon a Jacobite foot, are mightily scandalized that he finds the first effects of your Majesty’s great favor after the Parliament, and this I am afraid may discourage them, who have acted a contrary part for your Majesty’s service in it.
  Having hopes shortly to attend your Majesty, I shall at present offer no more trouble from,
      Madam,
    Your Majesty’s most dutiful, most faithful,
      and most obedient subject and servant.
  Holyrood House,
  Sept. the 25th. 1703.

Henry VII. to Sir Gilbert Talbot.
Kenilworth Castle
July, 1493
background: Considering the weakness of Henry VII.’s title to the throne, and considering also the fact that among the small remnant of ‘Greater Barons’ who survived the Wars of the Roses, the wearers of the white rose were the more numerous after the battle of Bosworth, it is not surprising that Henry of Richmond, during the first years of his reign, was set the troublesome task of beating off pretenders to his throne.  The Lady Margaret of Burgundy referred to in this letter was the widow of Charles the Bold, and sister of our Edward IV.  Her country was the rendezvous of the disaffected Yorkist nobility.
  Trusty and well beloved,--We greet you well; and not forgetting the great malice that the Lady Margaret of Burgundy beareth continually against us, as she showed lately in sending hither of a feigned boy, surmising him to have been the son of the Duke of Clarence, and caused him to be accompanied with the Earl of Lincoln, the Lord Lovel, and with great multitude of Irishmen and of Almains, whose end, blessed be God, was as you know well.  And foreseeing now the perseverance of the same her malice, by the untrue contriving eftsoon of another feigned lad called Perkin Warbeck, born at Tournay, in Picardy, which at first into Ireland called himself the bastard son of King Richard; after that the son of the said Duke of Clarence; and now the second son of our father, King Edward the IVth, whom God assoil; wherethrough she intended, by promising unto the Flemings and other of the archduke’s obeissaunce, to whom she labored daily to take her way, and by her promise to certain aliens, captains of strange nations, to have duchies, counties, baronies, and other lands, within this our royaume, to induce them thereby to land here, to the destruction and disinheritance of the noblemen and other our subjects the inhabitants of the same, and finally to the subversion of this our royaume, in case she may attain to her malicious purpose, that God defend.  We therefore, and to the intent that we may be alway purveied and in readiness to resist her malice, write unto you at this time; and will and desire you that, preparing on horseback, defensibly arrayed, four score persons, whereof we desire you to make as many spears, with their custrells, and demi-lances, wellhorsed as you can furnish, and the remainder to be archers and bills, you be thoroughly appointed and ready to come upon a day’s warning for to do us service of war in this case.  And you shall have for every horseman well and defensibly arrayed, that is to say, for a spear and his custrel twelvepence; a demi-lance ninepence; and an archer or bill, on horseback, eightpence by the day, from the time of your coming out unto the time of your return to your home again.  And thus doing, 7you shall have such thanks of us for your loving and true acquittal in that behalf as shall be to your weal and honor for time to come.  We pray you herein you will make such diligence as that you be ready with your said number to come unto us upon any our sudden warning.
  Given under our signet at our Castle of Kenilworth, the twentieth day of July (1493).
  To our trusty and well-beloved Knight and
    Councilor, Sir Gilbert Talbot.

Cardinal Wolsey to Dr. Stephen Gardiner
Esher
1529
background: Cavendish in his ‘Life of Wolsey,’ prints this pitiful letter from the original in the Ashmolean Museum.  It is dated from Asher (Esher), whither the Cardinal was ordered to retire after judgment had been pronounced against him for having transgressed the Statute of Præmunire.  In his day of authority and glory Wolsey was the haughtiest and richest subject in England; only a very few days sufficed to deprive him not only of all his former magnificence, but almost of the commonest domestic comforts.
  My own good Master Secretary,--After my most hearty commendations I pray you at the reverence of God to help, that expedition be used in my persuits, the delay whereof so replenishes my heart with heaviness, that I can take no rest; not for any vayne fere, but only for the miserable condition, that I am presently in, and likelihood to continue in the same, only that you, in whom is my assured trust, do help & relieve me therein; For first, continuing here in this mowest & corrupt year, being entered into the passion of the dropsy.  Cum prostatione appetitus et continuo insomnio.  I cannot live.
  Wherefor of necessity I must be removed to some other drier ayer and place, where I may have commodity of physicians.  Secondly, having but Yorke, which is now decayed by viii. C. li. by the year, I cannot tell how to live, & keep the poor number of folks which I now have, my house there be in decay, and of everything mete for household on provided and furnished.
  I have no apparel for my houses there, nor money to bring me thether nor to live with till the propysse time of the year shall come to remove thether.  these things considered, Mr. Secretary, must nedys make me in agaony and heaviness, my age therewith and sickness considered, alas Mr. Secretary, you with other my lords showed me, that I should otherwise be furnished & seen unto, you know in your learning & conscience, whether I should forfeit my spiritualities of Wynchester or no.  Alas! the qualities of my offences considered, with the great punishment & loss of goods that I have sustained, ought to move pitiful hearts; and the most noble King, to whom if it would please you of your cheritable goodness to show the promises after your accustom wisdom & dexterity, it is not to be doubted, but his highness would have consideration and compassion, augmenting my living, and appointing such things as should be convenient for my furniture, which to do shall be to the King’s high honor, meryte, & discharge of conscience, & to you great praise for the bringing of the same to pass for your old bringer up and loving friend.  This kindness exhibits from the King’s highness shall prolong my life for some little while, though it shall not be long, by the mean whereof his grace shall take profit & by my death now.  What is it to his highness to give some convenient portion out of Wynchester, & Seynt Albons, his grace taking with my hearty good will the residue.  Remember, good Mr. Secretary, my poor degre, & what service I have done, and how now approaching to death I must begin the world again.  I beseech you therefore, moved with pity and compassion soak me in this my calamity, and to your power which I know is great, relieve me; and I with all mine shall not only ascribe this my relief unto you, but also pray to God for the increase of your honor, & as my poor shall increase, so I shall not fail to requite your kindness.
  Written hastily at Asher, with the rude and shacking hand of 
      Your daily bedysman
        And Assured friend,
          T. CARLIS EBOB.

Sir Thomas More to his Wife.
Court at Woodstock
September 3, 1529
background: Lord Campbell, in his ‘Lives of the Chancellors,’ lays particular stress on this beautiful letter written by Sir Thomas More to his wife on receipt of the news that the greater part of his house at Chelsea (with the outhouses and granaries) had been destroyed by fire.  The biographer is more attracted by the unusually simple style of the composition, and by the kindliness of disposition and unaffected piety of this good and gifted martyr, than by all his other elaborate writings and speeches.  A few weeks after this grievous domestic mishap, the most upright of Henry VIII.’s councilors was sworn in Lord Chancellor of England.
  Mistress Alice,--In my most hearty will, I recommend me to you.  And whereas I am informed by my son Heron of the loss of our barns, and our neighbors also, with all the corn that was therein, albeit (saving God’s pleasure) it is great pity of so much good corn lost, yet since it was like him to send us such a chance, we must not only be content, but also be glad of his visitation.  He sent us all that we have lost: and since he has by such a chance taken it away again, his pleasure be fulfilled.  Let us never grudge thereat, but take it in good worth, and heartily thank him, as well for adversity, as for prosperity.  And par adventure we have more cause to thank him for our loss, than for our winning.  For his wisdom better sees what is good for us than we do ourselves.  Therefore I pray you be of good cheer, and take all the household with you to church, and there thank God both for that he has given us, and for that he has left us, which if it please him, he can increase when he will.  And if it please him to leave us yet less, at his pleasure be it.  I pray you to make some good in search what my poor neighbors have lost, and bid them take no thought therefore, and if I should not leave myself a spoon, there shall no poor neighbor of mine bear no loss by any chance happened in my house.  I pray you be with my children and household merry in God.  And devise somewhat with your friends, what way was best to take, for provision to be made for corn for our household and for seed this year coming, if you think it good that we keep the ground still in our hands.
  And whether you think it good yet we so shall do or not, yet I think it were not best suddenly thus to leave it all up, and to put away our folk of our farm, till we have somewhat advised us thereon.  Howbeit if we have more now than you shall need, and which can get the other master’s, you may then discharge us of them.  But I would not that any men were suddenly sent away he wote nere wether.  At my coming hither, I perceived none other, but that I should tary still with the Kings grace.  But now I shall (I think), because of this chance, get leave this next week to come home and see you; and then shall we further devise together upon all things, what order shall be best to take:  and thus as heartily fare you well with all our children as you can wish.
  At Woodstock the third day of September, by the hand of
      Your loving husband
          THOMAS MORE, Knight.
    Not the least curious of the manuscripts in the Vatican Library at Rome are the original autographs of Henry VIII.’s love letters to Anne Boleyn.  It is supposed they were stolen from this lady at the end of the year 1528.  They remained in the Vatican until the French appropriated them, with other treasures of art and literature, after the invasion of Italy at the close of last century.  They were restored at the peace of 1815.  Halliwell, in his ‘Letters of the Kings of England,’ attaches great importance to this letter as fixing the period of the commencement of the King’s affection for Anne Boleyn.  Henry VIII. complains of ‘having been above a whole year struck with the dart of love.’

Henry VIII. to Anne Boleyn.
England
August, 1528
  On turning over in my mind the contents of your last letters, I have put myself into great agony, not knowing how to interpret them, whether to my disadvantage, as you show in some places, or to my advantage, as I understand them in some others, beseeching you earnestly to let me know expressly your whole mind as to the love between us two.  It is absolutely necessary for me to obtain this answer, having been for above a whole year stricken with the dart of love, and not yet sure whether I shall fail or find a place in your heart and affection, which last point has prevented me for some time past from calling you my mistress; because, if you only love me with an ordinary love, that name is not suitable for you, because it denotes a singular love, which is far from common.  But if you please to do the office of a true loyal mistress and friend, and to give up yourself body and heart to me, who will be, and have been, your most loyal servant (if your rigor does not forbid me) I promise you that not only the name shall be given you, but also that I will take you for my only mistress, casting off all others besides you out of my thoughts and affections, and serve you only.  I beseech you to give an entire answer to this my rude letter, that I may know on what and how far I may depend.  And if it does not please you to answer me in writing, appoint some place where I may have it by word of mouth, and I will go thither with all my heart.
  No more, for fear of tiring you.
  Written by the hand of him who would willingly remain yours,
      H. R.

Henry VIII. to Anne Boleyn.
England
1528
  The approach of the time for which I have so long waited rejoices me so much, that it seems almost to have come already.  However, the entire accomplishment cannot be till the two persons meet, which meeting is more desired by me than any thing in this world; for what joy can be greater upon earth than to have the company of her who is dearest to me, knowing likewise that she does the same on her part, the thought of which gives me the greatest pleasure.
  Judge what an effect the presence of that person must have on me, whose absence has grieved my heart more than either words or writing can express, and which nothing can cure, but that begging you, my mistress, to tell your father from me, that I desire him to hasten the time appointed by two days, that he may be at court before the old term, or, at farthest, on the day prefixed; for otherwise I shall think he will not do the lover’s turn, as he said he would, nor answer my expectation.
  No more at present for lack of time, hoping shortly that by word of mouth I shall tell you the rest of the sufferings endured by me from your absence.
  Written by the hand of the secretary, who wishes himself at this moment privately with you, and who is, and always will be,
      Your loyal and most assured servant,
          H. no other (A. B.) seeks R.

Anne Boleyn to Cardinal Wolsey.
England
1528
background: Anne Boleyn addressed this naive letter to Wolsey concerning the dispensation for her marriage.  It will be remembered that Anne was led to suppose that the delay of her marriage was caused by the Cardinal’s wish for another alliance, whereas he was really employing all his influence to induce Pope Clement VII. to issue the decretal bull.  The ‘recompense for his pains’ turned out to be that Anne, as Queen Consort, changed her servile admiration of him into bitter enmity.  Wolsey describes her as his ‘night-crow that never slept, but studied and continually imagined his utter destruction.’
  My Lord,--In my most humblest wise that my poor heart can think, I do thank your grace for your kind letter, and for your rich and goodly present, the which I shall never be able to deserve without your help; of the which I have hitherto had so great plenty, that all the days of my life I am most bound of all creatures, next the King’s grace, to love and serve your grace; of the which I beseech you never to doubt that ever I shall vary from this thought as long as any breath is in my body.  And as touching your grace’s trouble with the sweat, I thank the Lord that them that I desired and prayed for are scaped, and that is the King and you; not doubting but that God has preserved you both for great causes known only of his high wisdom.  And as for the coming of the Legate, I desire that much, and if it be God’s pleasure, I pray him to send this matter shortly to a good end, and then I trust, my lord, to recompense part of your great pains.  In the which I must require you in the meantime to accept my good will, in the stead of the power, the which must proceed partly from you, as our Lord knoweth; to whom I beseech to send you long life with continuance in honor.  Written with the hand of her that is most bound to be
        Your humble and obedient servant,
              ANNE BOLEYN.

Queen Elizabeth to the King of France.
England
November 12, 1593.
background: When Henry the Fourth, of France, abjured Protestantism, his ambassador, Morlant, was ordered to break the matter to Queen Elizabeth and to endeavor to calm her feelings by offering the poor plea of ‘urgent motives of state.’  It is said that after writing the following epistle the Queen sought to appease her wrath by reading Boethius’s ‘Consolations of Philosophy.’
  Ah, what grief! ah, what regret! ah, what pangs have seized my heart, at the news which Morlant has communicated!  My God! is it possible that any worldly consideration could render you regardless of the divine displeasure?  Can we reasonably expect any good result can follow such an iniquity?  How could you imagine that He, whose hand has supported and upheld your cause so long, would fail you at your need?  It is a perilous thing to do ill that good may come of it!  Nevertheless, I yet hope your better feelings my return, and, in the meantime, I promise to give you the first place in my prayers, that Esau’s hands may not defile the blessing of Jacob.  The friendship and fidelity you promise to me, I own I have dearly earned; but of that I should never have repented, if you had not abandoned your father.  I cannot now regard myself as your sister, for I always prefer that which is natural to that which is adopted, as God best knows, whom I beseech to guard and keep you in the right way, with better feelings.
  Your sister, if it be after the old fashion: with the new I will have nothing to do.
                  E. R.

Queen Elizabeth to Lady Norris upon the Death of her Son.
England
unknown
background: This note of condolence, disclosing a mood of tender sympathy very unusual with Queen Elizabeth, is nevertheless highly characteristic.  Her habitual regal reserve is maintained with quiet dignity.
  Mine own dear Crow,
  Although we have deferred long to represent unto you our grieved thoughts, because we liked full well to yield you the first Reflections of our Misfortunes, whom we have always sought to cherish and comfort; yet knowing now what necessity must bring it to your ears, and nature consequently must move many passionate affections in your Heart, we have resolved no longer to smother, either our care for your sorrow, or the sympathy of our grief for his Death; wherein if society in sorrowing work diminution, we do assure you by this true messenger of our Mind, that Nature can have stirred no more dolorous affections in you as a mother for a dear Son, than the gratefulness and memory of his Services past had wrought in us his Sovereign apprehension of the miss of so worthy a Servant.  But now that Nature’s common Work is done, and he that was born to die has paid his Tribute, let that Christian Discretion stay the flux of your immoderate grieving which has instructed you both by Example and Knowledge, that nothing of this kind has happened but by God’s Providence, and that these Lines from your loving and gracious Sovereign serve to assure you, that there shall ever appear the lively Characters of you and yours that are left, in our valuing rightly all their faithful and honest Endeavors.  More we will not write of this subject, but have dispatched this Gentleman to visit both your Lord, and condole with you in the true sense of your Love; and to pray you, that the World may see, that what Time cures in weak Minds, that Discretion and Moderation may help in you in this Accident, where there is so opportune occasion to demonstrate true Patience and true Moderation.

Queen Elizabeth to James VI. of Scotland.
England
1585
background: In warning James VI., of Scotland, against his double-dealing conduct, Queen Elizabeth, in her usual emphatic style, hints at her intention of ignoring the will of Henry VIII., and of respecting the rights of primogeniture by secretly nominating the descendant of her Aunt Margaret to the reversion of the English crown.  Although naturally fond of secrecy and dissimulation the Queen could not publicly avow her determination in this matter without courting troublesome opposition from the partisans of the other claimants.
  Right dear Brother,--Your gladsome acceptance of my offered amity, together with the desire you seem to have engraven in your mind to make merits correspondent, makes me in full opinion that some enemies to our good will shall loose much travel, with making frustrate their baiting stratagems, which I know to be many, and by sondry means to be explored.  I cannot halt with you so much as to deny that I have seen such evident shows of your contrarious dealings, that if I made not my reckening the better of the months, I might condemn you as unworthy of such as I mind to show myself toward you, and therefore I am well pleased to take any color to defend your honor, and hope that you will remember that who seeks two strings to one bow, he may shoot strong, but never straight; and if you suppose that princes causes be vailed so covertly that no intelligence may be wary them, deceive not yourself; we old foxes can find shifts to save ourselves by others malice, and come by knowledge of greatest secret, especially if it touch our freholde.  It becomes, therefore, all our rencq to deal sincerely, lest, if we use it not, when we do it, we be hardly believed.  I write not this, my dear brother, for doubt but for remembrances.
  My ambassador writes so much of your honorable treatment of him and of Alexander, that I believe they be converted Scots.  You oblige me for them; for which I render you a million of most entire thanks, as she that means to deserve many a good thought in your breast throw good desart.  And for that your request is so honorable, retaining so much reason, I was out of [my] senses if I should not suspend of any heresay till the answer of your own action, which the actor ought best to know, and so assure yourself I mean and vow to do; with this request, that you will afford me the reciproque.  And thus, with my many petitions to the Almighty for your long life and preservation, I end these scribbled lines.
      Your very assured loving sister and cousin,
              ELIZABETH R.

Queen Elizabeth to James VI. of Scotland
England
February, 1586-7
background: Queen Elizabeth here ridicules a proposal made to her on the part of the Scotch Commissioners that Mary, Queen of Scots, should be allowed to leave her captivity and be placed in the keeping of some neutral prince, subject to a guarantee from her relations that she should for ever abstain from all interference in the affairs of England.  The letter indicates with tolerable clearness Elizabeth’s intention to sacrifice the life of her dangerous rival.
  Be not carried away, my dear brother, with the lewd persuasions of such, as instead of informing you of my to nideful and helpless cause of defending the breath that God has given me, to be better spent than split by the bloody invention of traitors hands, may perhaps make you believe, that either the offense was not so great, or if that cannot serve them, for the over-manifest trial which in public and by the greatest and most in this land has been manifestly proved, yet they will make that her life may be saved and mine safe which would God were true; for when you make view of my long danger indured these four—well my five—months time to make a taste of, the greatest witz among my own, and than of French, and last of you, will grant with me, that if nide were not more than my malice she should not have her merit.
  And now for a good conclusion of my long-tarried-for answer.  Your commissioners tell me, that I may trust her in the hand of some indifferent prince, and have all her cousins and allies promise she will no more seek my ruin.  Dear brother and cousin, way in true and equal balance would they lack not much good ground when such stuff serves for their building.  Suppose you I am so mad to trust my life in anothers hand and send it out of my own?  If the young master of Gray, for curring favor with you, might fortune say it, yet old master Mylvin has yours enough to teach him more wisdom than tell a prince of any judgment such a contrarious frivolous maimed reason.  Let your councelors, for your honor, discharge their duty so much to you as to declare the absurdity of such an offer; and, for my part, I do assure myself to much of your wisdom, as, though like a most natural good son you charged them to seek all means they could devise with it or judgment to save her life, yet I can not, nor do not, allege any fault to you of these persuasions, for I take it that you will remember, that advise or desire ought ever agree with the surtye of the party sent to and honor of the sender, which when both you weigh, I doubt not but your wisdom will escuse my nide, and wait my necessity, and not accuse me either of malice or of hate.
  And now to conclude.  Make account, I pray you, of my firm friendship love and care, of which you may make sure account, as one that never minds to fail from my word, nor swarve from our league, but will increase, by all good means, any action that may make true show of my stable amity; from which, my dear brother, let no sinister whisperers, nor busy troblars of princes states, persuade to leave your surest, and stike to unstable staies.  Suppose them to be but the echoes to such whose stipendaries the be, and will do more for their gain than your good.  And so, God hold you ever in his blessed keeping, and make you see your true friends.  Excuse my not writing sooner, for pain in one of my knees was only the cause.
      Your most assured loving sister and cousin,
              ELIZABETH R.

Sir Francis Drake to Lord Walsingham
England
July 31, 1588
background: It was thought in Spain, at least by the priests and courtiers who surrounded Philip II., that one battle at sea and one battle on land would bring England to her senses, and compel Queen Elizabeth to acknowledge the supremacy of the Pope; and not a little of the literature of Spain in the years 1587 and 1588 pointed to the importance of capturing our Queen and killing Drake. The English Admiral was the chief offender.  By his successful expedition in 1587, he had retarded the invasion by a whole year, having tamed the Spanish, and, as he said, ‘singed the King’s beard.”  He is writing to that most successful diplomat, Walsingham, at the time we were hotly pursuing the dying Armada.
  Most Honorable,--I am commanded to send these prisoners ashore by my Lord Admiral, which had, here this, been long done, but that I thought there being here might have done something which is not thought meet now.
  Let me beseech your Honor that they may be presented unto her Majesty, either by your honor, or my honorable good Lord, my Lord Chancellor, or both of you.  The one, Don Pedro, is a man of great estimation with the King of Spain, and thought next in this army to the Duke of Sedonya.  If they should be given from me unto any other, it would be some gref to my friends.  If her Majesty will have them, God defend but I should think it happy.
  We have the army of Spain before us, and mind with the Grace of God, to wrestle a poull with him.
  There was never anything pleased me better than the seeing the enemy flying with a Southerly wind to the Northwards.  God grant you have a good eye to the Duke of Parma, for with the Grace of God, if we live, I doubt it not, but were it be long so to handle the matter with the Duke of Sedonya, as he shall wish himself at Saint Marie Port among his orange trees.  God give us grace to depend upon him, so shall we not doubt victory; for our cause is good.
  Humbly taking my leave, this last of July, 1588.
      Your Honor’s faithfully to be commanded ever,
            FRA: DRAKE.

John ap Rice to Thomas Cromwell, Visitor-General of Monasteries.
Bury
November 5, 1535.
background: Some 150 letters relative to the suppression of the monasteries were edited in 1843 by Mr. Thomas Wright for the Camden Society, from the originals in the British Museum.  They illustrate in very plain language the depravity that was rampant in the lesser monasteries, and the corruption that had wormed itself into many of the larger establishments; and even if it be allowed that Henry VIII.’s policy of confiscation was based on selfish motives, and that his plea of religious reform was subordinate to his secular aims, the suppression of four-fifths of the monasteries was justified by the voluminous report of the Visitor-General, Thomas Cromwell, in what is deservedly called the ‘Black Book.’  Although the Act of 1539 did not actually dissolve the greater houses, their occupants were  either persuaded or terrified into a voluntary surrender.  The cases of stubborn and recalcitrant abbots were dealt with by indictments for high treason.
  Please it your mastership, forasmuch as I suppose you shall have suit made unto you touching Burie or we return, I thought convenient to advertise you of our proceedings there, and also of the compertes, of the same.
  As for the abbot, we found nothing suspect as touching his living, but it was detected that he lay much forth in his granges, that he delighted much in playing at dice and cards, and therein spent much money, and in building for his pleasure.  He did not preach openly.  Also that he converted diverse firms into copy holdes, whereof poor men do complain.  Also he seems to be addicted to the maintaining of such superstitious ceremonies as has been used heretofore.
  As touching the convent, we could get at little or no reports among them, although we did use much diligence in our examination, and thereby, with some other arguments gathered of their examinations, I firmly believe and suppose that they had considered and compacted before our coming that they should disclose nothing.
  And yet it is confessed and proved, that there was here such frequency of women coming and resorting to this monastery as to no place more.  Among the relics we found much vanity and superstition, as the coles that Saint Laurence was toasted withall, the paring of S. Edmundes naylles, S. Thomas of Canterbry penknife and his boots, and diverse skulls for the headache; pieces of the holy cross able to make a holy cross of; other relics for rayne and ceertain other superstitions usages, for avoiding of weeds growing in corn, with such other.  Here depart of them that be under age upon an eight, and of them that be above age upon a five, would depart if they might, and they be of the best sort in the house and of best learning and judgment.  The whole number of the convent before we came was lx., saving one, besides iij that were at Oxford.  Of Elie I have written to your mastership by my fellow Richard a Lee.  And thus Almighty God have you in his tuicion.  From Burie, vth November.
          Your servant most bounden
              JOHNE AP RICE.
    
Richard Beerley to Sir Thomas Cromwell, Visitor-General of Monasteries.
unknown
1536
background: This letter, illustrative of the condition of some religious houses, was written by a monk of the abbey of Pershore.
  Most reverent lord in God, second person in this realm of England, endure with all grace and goodness, I submit my self unto your grace and goodness, desiring you myckely to be good and gracious lord unto me sinful and poor creature, my lowly and myck scrybullyng unto your noble grace at this time is gruggyng in my conscience that the religion which we do observe and keep is no rule of Sentt Benett, nor yet no commandment of God, nor of no Sentt, but lyyth and foulysse sermons, made some in old time and some in our time, by lyyth and ondyscrytt faders, which have done their duties and fulfilled their own sermons, an let the precepts an commandments of God go.  And so have I do this six year, which does now give my conscience sore, that I have been a dissembler so long time, the which religion say sent James, is in vain and bringing forth no good fruits; better out than in the religion, except it were the true religion of Christ.  Also we do nothing search for the doctrine of Christ, but all follow our own sesyaly and pleser.  And this religion, as I suppose, is all in vain glory, and nothing worthy to be except neither before God nor man.  Also, most gracious lord, there is a secret thing in my conscience which does move me to go out of the religion, an if it were never so perfect, which no man may know but my ghostly father, the which I suppose if a man must gauge in other young persons as in me self, for Christ say, nolite judicare et non judicabimini; therefore I will gauge my own conscience first, the which fault he shall know of me hereafter more largely, and many other fowll vycys don among religious men, not religious men, as I think they ought not to be called, but disassemblers with God.  Now, most gracious lord and most worthiest victor that ever came among us, help me out of this vain religion, and make me your servant, hand-made, and beydman, and save my soul, which should be lost if ye help it not, the which you may save with on word speaking, and make me which am now not to come unto grace and goodness.  Now I will instruct your grace somewhat of religious men, and how the Kings grace commandment is kept in putting forth of books the bishop of Rome userpt power.  Monks drink an bowll after collacyon tell ten or xii. of the clock, ane come to mattens as drunk as myss, and some at cards, some at dice, and at tables, some come to mattens begining at the mydes, and some when it is almost done, and would not come there so only for bodily punishment, nothing for Gods sake, with many other vycys the use, which I have no lesser now to express.  Also abbettes, monks, priest, do little or nothing to put out of books the bishop of Romes name, for I my self do know in diverse books where is name and his userpt power upon us is.  No more unto your noble grace at this time, but Jesus preserve you to pleasure.  Amen.
  Your commissary commanded me to write my mind unto your noble grace, by my oath I took of him in our chapter hows.
      Be me, your beydman, Ryc. Beerley, now
        monk in the monastery of Pershor.


Sir Francis Bacon to Sir Thomas Bodley.
unknown
1607
background: This little gem, composed in honor of the founder of the Bodleian Library, lies half-hidden in ponderous volume entitled ‘Cabala,’ consisting of some very important correspondence of the Elizabethan and early Stuart period. The letter is also published in some editions of Bacon’s works.  It was addressed to Sir Thomas Bodley on the occasion of Bacon’s presenting him with a copy of the ‘Advancement of Learning.’  So graceful a recognition of services to literature from the man of all others most capable of appreciating them, must have been very gratifying to the courtly diplomatist, at a time when public benefactions were sparingly acknowledged.
  Sir,--I think no man may more truly say with the Psalm, multum incola fuit anima mea.  For I do confess, since I was of any understanding, my mind has in effect, been absent from that I have done, and in absence errors are committed, which I do willingly acknowledge; and among the rest, this great one that led the rest; that knowing my self by inward calling to be fitter to hold a Book, than to play a Part, I have led my Life in civil Causes; for which I was not very fit by Nature, and more unfit by the pre-occupation of my Mind.  Therefore calling my self home, I have now for a time enjoyed myself; where likewise I desire to make the World partaker; my labors (if so I may term that which was the comfort of my other labors) I have dedicated to the King, desirous if there be any good in them, it may be as fat of a Sacrifice incensed to his Honor; and the second Copy have sent unto you, not only in good affection, but in a kind of Congruity, in regard of your Great and rare desert of learning.  For Books are the Shrines where the Saint is, or is believed to be.  And you having built an Ark to save Learning from Deluge, deserve in Propriety, any new Instrument or Engine, whereby Learning should be Improved or Advanced.

James Howel to his Father.
London
December 11, 1625.
background: This letter is interesting as being a contemporary account of the death of James I., and of the accession of Charles I.  The suspicion that the King was poisoned by the instrumentality of Buckingham, though very improbable, has been suggested by other writers besides Howel.
  Sir,--I received yours of the 3rd February by the hands of my cousin Thomas Guin of Trecastle.
  It was my fortune to be on Sunday was fortnight at Theobalds, where his late majesty King James departed this life, and went to his last rest upon the day of rest, presently after Sermon was done:  A little before the break of day, he sent for the Prince, who rose out of his bed, and came in his night-gown; the King seemed to have some earnest thing to say unto him, and so endeavored to rouse himself upon his Pillow, but his Spirits were so spent that he had not strength to make his words audible.  He died of a fever which began with an Ague, and some Scotch Doctors mutter at a plaster the Countess of Buckingham applied at the outside of his stomach:  ’Tis thought the last breach of the match with Spain, which for many years he had so vehemently desired, took too deep an impression in him, and that he was forced to rush into a War, now in his declining age, having lived in a continual uninterrupted peace his whole live, except some collateral aids he had sent his Son-in-law.  As soon as he expired, the Privy Council sat, and in less than a quarter of an hour, King Charles was proclaimed at Theobalds Court-gate, by Sir Edward Zouch Knight Marshal, Master Secretary Conway dictating unto him, that whereas it had pleased God to take to his mercy our most gracious Sovereign King James of famous memory, we proclaim Prince Charles his rightful and indubitable heir to be King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, &c.  The Knight Marshal mistook, saying, his rightful and dubitable heir, but he was rectified by the Secretary.  This being done, I took my horse instantly, and came to London first, except one, who was come a little before me, insomuch, that I found the gates shut.  His now Majesty took Coach, and the Duke of Buckingham with him, and came to Saint James; in the evening he was proclaimed at White Hall Gate, in Cheapside, and other places in a sad shower of rain; and the weather was suitable to the condition wherein he finds the Kingdom which is cloudy; for he is left engaged in a war with a potent Prince, the people by long desuetude unapt for arms, the Fleet Royal in quarter repair and himself without a queen, his sister without a country, the crown pitifully laden with debts, and the purse of the State lightly ballasted, though it never had better opportunity to be rich than it had these last twenty years:  But God Almighty, I hope will make him emerge, and pull this Island out of all the plunges, and preserve us from worser times.  The plague is begun in White-Chapel, and as they say, in the same house, at the same day of the month, with the same number that died twenty two years since, when queen Elizabeth departed.  There are great preparations for the funeral, and there is a design to buy all the cloth for mourning white, and then to put it to the dyers in gross, which is like to save the crown a good deal of money, the drapers murmur extremely at the Lord Cranfield for it.
  I am not settled yet in any stable Condition, but I lie windbound at the Cape of Good Hope, expecting some gentle gale to launch out into any employment.
  So with my love to all my brothers and sisters at the Bryn and near Brecknock, I humbly crave a continuance of your prayers and blessings to,
                Your dutiful son,
                    J. H.

Edward Hyde, Earl of Clarendon, to Sir Henry Bennet.
unknown
April 10, 1660
background: The feverish condition of the public pulse, sickened by the dominion of the soldiery and excited by the trickeries of incompetent agitators, is here gleefully described by Lord Clarendon on the eve of the restoration of monarchy.
  Sir,--The Parliament was, as you have heard, to be dissolved upon Thursday the 15th of last month, but there had been so many artifices used by the Republican party, to stay the business of the Militia, and afterwards to stop and corrupt it at the Press that the house resolved to sit again the next day, and then about seven o’clock at night they dissolved to the universal joy of all the kingdom, the republican party only excepted, who had no mind to cashier themselves of a power they were like again never to be possessed of; the people not being like to choose many of them to serve in the next parliament.
  Before they dissolved they declared the engagement, by which men were bound to submit to the government without King or House of Lords, to be void and null, and to be taken of the file of all records wherever it was entered; and this might be the ground of that report at Calais, that they had voted the Government to be by King, Lords and Commons; besides there was a pretty accident that might contribute thereunto, for the day before the Parliament dissolved, at full Exchange, there came a fellow with a ladder upon his shoulders and a pot of paint in his hand, and set the ladder in the place where the last King’s statue had stood, and then went up and wiped out that inscription which had been made after the death of the King, Exit Tyrannus &c., and as soon as he had done it threw up his cap and cried ‘God bless King Charles the Second,’ in which the whole Exchange joined with the greatest shout you can imagine, and immediately caused a huge bonfire to be made which the neighbors of Cornhill and Cheapside imitated with three or four more, and so that action passed nor do I find there was any order for it.  There was another signal passage likewise before the dissolution:  upon the reading the instructions to the Council of State during the interval of Parliament (which is not to sit till the 25th of this month) there is one which gives them authority to send agents or ambassadors to foreign Princes, whereupon Scott stood up and desired that there might be an exception, that they should not send to Charles Stuart, which gave occasion to very many members of the House to stand up and declare that they were in no degree guilty and did from their souls abhor the horrid and odious murder of the late king, and did detest the author of it.  Upon which Scott again stood up, and said that he indeed, and some others, had cut off the King’s head, but that the other gentlemen had brought him to the block, which put the rest into so much passion that they would call him to the bar, but after some heat declined it, saying he should answer it at another bar.  The writs issued out the next day for the choosing members to meet the 25th of this month; and very great care is taken in all places to choose such men as are most like to settle the government as it ought to be.  And now after I have told you all this, if I had not a very ill reputation with you for being over sanguine with reference to England, I will tell you that I hope we may save those honest gentlemen a labor, or at least do our own business with very great approbation.
              Yours &c.

Andrew Marvell to William Ramsden.
unknown
November 28, 1670
background: At the Restoration the poet Marvell, hitherto known as the colleague and friend of Milton, was returned to Parliament for the borough of Hull, and at once developed a policy so original and courageous that his name has become almost synonymous with the title of patriot.  His private letters to his friends during the early years of Charles II.’s reign are unique in the picture they give of the dark side of the times. Several valuable letters were written by Marvell to one William Skinner, who had not the curiosity to keep any of them, but gave them to the pastry-maid to put under pie-bottoms. (Thoresby Correspondence, vol, ii. p. 102.)
  Dear Will,--I need not tell you I am always thinking of you.  All that has happened, which is remarkable, since I wrote, is as follows.  The Lieutenancy of London, chiefly Sterlin the Mayor, and Sir J. Robinson, alarmed the King continually with the Conventicles there.  So the King sent them strict and large powers.  The Duke of York every Sunday would come over thence to look to the peace.  To say truth, they met in numerous open assemblies, without any dread of government.  But the train bands in the city, and soldiery in Southwark and suburbs, harassed and abused them continually; they wounded many, and killed some Quakers especially, while they took all patiently.  Hence arose two things of great remark.  The Lieutenancy, having got orders to their mind, pick out Hays and Jekill, the innocentest of the whole party, to show their power on.  They offer them illegal bonds of five thousand pounds a man, which if they would not enter into, they must go to prison.  So they were committed, and at last (but it is a very long story) got free.  Some friends engaged for them.  The other was the trial of Pen and Mead, quakers, at the Old Baily.  The jury not finding them guilty, as the Recorder and Mayor would have had them, they were kept without meat or drink some three days, till almost starved, but would not alter their verdict; so fined and imprisoned.  There is a book out which relates all the passages, which were very pertinent, of the prisoners, but prodigiously barbarous by the Mayor and Recorder.  The Recorder, among the rest, commended the Spanish Inquisition, saying it would never be well till we had something like it.  The King had occasion for sixty thousand pounds.  Sent to borrow it of the city.  Sterlin, Robinson, and all the rest of that faction, were at it many a week, and could not get above ten thousand.  The fanatics under persecution, served his Majesty.  The other part, both in court and city, would have prevented it.  But the King protested money would be acceptable.  So the King patched up, out of the Chamber, and other ways, twenty thousand pounds.  The fanatics, of all sorts, forty thousand.  The King, though against many of his council, would have the Parliament sit this twenty-fourth of October.  He, and the Keeper spoke of nothing but to have money.  Some one million three hundred thousand pounds, to pay off the debts at interest; and eight hundred thousands for a brave navy next Spring.
  Both speeches forbid to be printed, for the King said very little, and the Keeper, it was thought, too much in his politic simple discourse of foreign affairs.  The House was thin and obsequious.  They Voted at first they would supply him, according to his occasions, Nemine, as it was remarked, contradicente; but few affirmatives, rather a silence as of men ashamed and unwilling.
  Sir R. Howard, Seymour, Temple, Car, and Hollis, openly took leave of their former party, and fell to head the King’s business.  There is like to be a terrible Act of Conventicles.  The Prince of Orange here is much made of.  The King owes him a great deal of money.  The Paper is full.
      I am your’s, &c.

John Wesley to a Friend.
London
December 20, 1751
background: The rise and progress of Methodism is as marked a feature of the reign of George II., as the spread of Puritanism is of the reign of Queen Elizabeth. The Puritans were called into being by the injudicious activity of the Queen and her prelates against a body of men whose religious zeal rejected the superstitious ceremonies which were retained in order to win over the English Roman Catholics to the reformed faith; the Methodists supplied a want; their purpose was to infuse a little enthusiasm and discipline among the slack and lifeless regular clergy.  Bishop Burnet, the Whig, and after him, Bishop Atterbury, the Tory, both coincide in their estimate of the sorry state of public worship during the first quarter of the eighteenth century.  If field-preaching was common in many popular districts, it was because there were no churches in them.  No wonder then, that, as the Puritans grew from being an insignificant sect into a powerful political faction, the followers of John Wesley, in England alone, should have numbered 71,000 the year of his death.
  My dear Friend,--I think the right method of preaching is this.  At our first beginning to preach at any place, after a general declaration of the love of God to sinners, and His willingness that they should be saved, to preach the law, in the strongest, the closest, the most searching manner possible.
  After more and more persons are convinced of sin, we may mix more and more of the gospel, in order to beget faith, to raise into spiritual life those whom the law has slain.  I would not advise to preach the law without the gospel, any more than the gospel without the law.  Undoubtedly, both should be preached in their turns; yea, both at once, or both in one.  All the conditional promises are instances of this.  They are law and gospel mixed together.
  In this manner, not only my brother and I, but Mr. Maxfield, Nelson, James Jones, Westall, and Reeves, all preached at the beginning.  By this preaching, it pleased God to work those mighty effects in London, Bristol, Kingswood, Yorkshire, and Newcastle.  By means of this, twenty-nine persons received remission of sins, in one day, at Bristol only; most of them, while I was opening and enforcing our Lord’s sermon on the mount.  In this manner John Downes, John Bennet, John Haughton, and all the other Methodists, preached, till James Wheatley came among them.  The change he has introduced has done great harm to David Tratham, Thomas Webb, Robert Swindells, and John Maddern; all of whom are but shadows of what they were.  It has likewise done great harm to hearers as well as preachers, diffusing among them a prejudice against the scriptural Methodist manner of preaching Christ, so that they can no longer hear the plain old truth, with profit or pleasure, nay hardly with patience.  The gospel preachers, so called, corrupt their hearers, and they vitiate their taste.  They feed them with sweetmeats, till the genuine wine of the Kingdom seems quite insipid to them.  They give them cordial upon cordial, which make them all life and spirit for the present; but, meantime, their appetite is destroyed, so that they can neither retain nor digest the pure milk of the word.
  According to the constant observations I have made, in all parts both of England and Ireland, preachers of this kind spread death, not life, among their hearers.  This was the case when I went last into the north.  For some time before my coming, John Downes had scarce been able to preach at all; the three others, in the round, were such as style themselves ‘gospel preachers.’  When I came to review the societies, with great expectation of finding a vast increase, I found most of them lessened by one third.  One was entirely broken up.  That of Newcastle was less by a hundred members than when I visited it before; and, of those that remained, the far greater number, in every place, were cold, weary, heartless, and dead.  Such were the blessed effects of this gospel-preaching! of this new method of preaching Christ.
  On the other hand, when, in my return, I took an account of the societies in Yorkshire, chiefly under the care of John Nelson, one of the old way, I found them all alive, strong, and vigorous of soul, believing, loving, and praising God their Savior; and increased in number from eighteen or nineteen hundred to upwards of three thousand.  These had been continually fed with wholesome food.  From the beginning they had been taught both the law and the gospel.  God loves you; therefore love and obey Him.  Christ died for you; therefore die to sin.  Christ is risen; therefore rise in the image of God.  Christ lives evermore; therefore live to God, till you live with Him in glory.
  So we preached; and so you believed.  This is the scriptural way, the Methodist way, the true way.  God grant we may never turn there from, to the right hand or to the left.
  I am, my dear friend, your ever affectionate brother,
                JOHN WESLEY.

John Wesley to John King (one of his Preachers in America).
Near Leeds
July 28, 1775
background: Would that a few ‘gospel-preaches’ would take this bit of advice to heart.
  My dear Brother,--Always take advice or reproof as a favor:  it is the surest mark of love.
  I advised you once, and you took it as an affront; nevertheless I will do it once more.
  Scream no more, at the peril of your soul.  God now warns you by me, whom He has set over you.
  Speak as earnestly as you can, but do not scream.  Speak with all your heart, but with a moderate voice.  It was said of our Lord, ‘He shall not cry’; the word properly means, He shall not scream.  Herein, be a follower of me, as I am of Christ.  I often speak loud, often vehemently, but I never scream, I never strain myself.  I dare not.  I know it would be a sin against God and my own soul.  Perhaps one reason why that good man, Thomas Walsh, yea, and John Manners too, were in such grievous darkness before they died, was, because they shortened their own lives.
  O John, pray for an advisable and teachable temper!  By nature you are very far from it:  you are stubborn and headstrong.  Your last letter was written in a very wrong spirit.  If you cannot take advice from others, surely you might take it from your affectionate brother,
                  JOHN WESLEY.

List of Kings Ships
England
unknown
  “Here after ensues the Names of all the Kings Ships, as well that ride within the Port and Haven of Portsmith as thoo that ride within the River of Themmys, the xxxijth day of October in the xvijth year of our most drade Sovereign Lord King Henry the viijth.
  The GABRIEL ROYAL, of the tonnage of DCC. tons; and of the age of xvj years.
  The MARY ROSE, of the tonnage of VC. tons; and of the age of xiiij years.
  The PETER POMGARNET, of the tonnage of CCC.xl. tons; and of age xiiij years.
  The JOHN BAPTIST, of the tonnage of iiij.C. tons; and of age xiij years.
  The GREAT BARKE, of tonnage CC tons; and of age xij years.
  The LESSER BARKE, of the tonnage of Clx. tons; and of age xij. years.
  The MARY JAMES, of tonnage CClx tons; and of age xvj years.
  The MARY GEORGE, of tonnage CCxl. tons; and of age xv years.
  The MARY AND JOHN of the tonnage of ij.C. tons; and of age iiij. years.
  The PRIMEROSE, of the tonnage of Clx tons; and of age ij years.
  The MINION, of the tonnage of Clxxx tons; and all new.
  The MAUDELEN of DEPFORDE, of the tonnage of Cxx tons; and of the age of iij years.
  The KATERNE BARKE, of the tonnage of C tons; and of age iij. years.
  The MARY IMPEREALL, of tonnage of lxxx tons; and of the age of xiiij years.
  The TRINITE HENRYE, of the age of vj years; and of tonnage iiijxx tons.
  The BARKE OF MURLESSE, of tonnage of lx. tons; and new made.
  The SWEPSTAKE, of the tonnage of lxv tons; and iij years old.
  The SWALOWE, of the tonnage of lx tons; and new made.
  The GRYFFYN, of tonnage of lxxx tons; and of age xiij years.
  The GRETT SABRA, of the tonnage of fifty tons; and iij years old.
  The LESSERE SABRA, of the tonnage of xl tons; and of age iij years.
  The JOHN OF GRENEWYCHE, of the tonnage of 1 ton; and of xij years old.
  The PRISSE taken by Thomas Sperte, of the tonnage of three score ton; and of age xv years.
  The HULKE of the tonnage of Clx tons; and of age iij years.
  The MARY GYLFORDE, of the tonnage of Clx tons; and of age oon year.”

John Clerk, bishop of Bath, to Cardinal Wolsey, upon the state of Italy as affected by the Battle of Pavia.
unknown
unknown
background: The reader need hardly be informed that the Pope at this time was Clement the Seventh; who, previous to his taking the Papal Chair, had been known as the Cardinal de Medici.  His Pontificate was throughout conducted by a feeble and vacillating policy.  It was marked by two events not easily forgotten; the sacking of Rome, and the abolition of the papal authority in England.
  The Venetians and Florentines seeing them selves now in the discretion of the Imperials, whom they have not best entreated, be in a great fear, and therefore they not only arm them selves, but also have been vehemently in hand with the Pope that he should do in like manner, and have m . . . a description of great and high matters with his Holiness, as his Holiness showed unto me . . . .  to take no man’s right from him, but to maintain and defend their own; and that if the Imperials would demand any thing of them it might boldly be answered them, that they should nothing have.  The effect is that the Pope, the Venetians, the Florentines, the Duke of Ferrare, the Signoryes of Senys, Luke, and Mantua,l with other mean powers of Italy, should make a League for the defense and liberties of Italy; wherein they reckon that the Duke of Mylan would at length, when time should be, gladly enter, who as they reckon is now, and so is like for years to continue, in no less captive than the French King.  It is reckoned that amongst them, they should make well ij thousand spers, and xv thousand Swisses, and as many moo footmen of Italians as should be thought necessary; wherein there cane as they say lack no number, for to this purpose viz. for the liberation of Italy, where as in any other occasion they may make on, in this occasion they shall make iij.  In this description it is devised, first, as I said, to have the Duke of Mylan, who has in his hands the castle of Mylan and the castle of Cremona; which be the things of most importance in that Duchy.  The Pope should be contented to surrender unto him the Cities of Parma and Placentia, and have as much pention or cense for the same as he now has.  The Duke of Ferrare shall have his investiture in Modina and Regio, and pay therefore in ready money . . . . . ducattes; and it is meant that the Pope should have the realm of Naplis, which doubtless will easily no .. be obtained.  Their things be heir devised by the French faction and the Venetians, and they have been in hand with the Pope very vehemently in this matter, showing him that this is the very way which he should take, both for his honor, surety, and the liberty of Italy, which else shall be totally in subjection of Spaniards, being barbarous and unreasonable, and as odybyll people unto this nation as any can be.
  At such time as the Popis Holiness declared unto me this Devise, I showed His Holiness that I did not doubt but that of his great and high wisdom, he did consider right well that His Holiness was not in any such case that he should need to take one such way for his surety, for seeing that His Holiness had done nothing but that might be well justified, His Holiness should but, quantum ad se attinet, optime sperare de Cesare:  specially, that I knew the Kings Highness would not suffer that his Holiness should be in any manner of wise oncoragyd, as touching the Venetians.  I said his Holiness knew well enough they had offended; and their offence was but a money matter, wherein his Holiness might be a mean for them; and, percase they would not be ordered, I said good reason would his Holiness should forsake them.  And as touching this Description and Devise a fore said, all be it seemed now to have a fair face, and a semblance of good success, as the matters now stood; the Imperials being so far behind hand with their army, and having no little at this present time for the maintenance thereof; yet (I said) I doubted not but that His Holiness did right well consider the many fold inconveniences that might ensue thereby:  for albeit by this ways peraventur the army in Lombardy should be at a stay, and in some agony and perplexity for a season, yet there should be no doubt but that the Emperor and other Princes would never give up the matter so, but would shortly not only restore this army, but so renew and enforce the same, with the presence of their own parsons if need should be, that iij. such powers as Italy is should not be able to resist them: and percase they should resist, yet where as His Holiness has, to his great lawde, hitherto sought peace, rest, and quietness between Christian princes, especially here in Italy, this should be the ways to make for a long season, more cruel and universal war than was ever seen:  so that the wars past should not be compared to the wars to come, for those wars to come should be universal of all Italy against all the . . .  besides forth, and finally what should chance it in Gods hand, who being indifferent, (I said) th . .  was no doubt what likelihood, the powers of Italy, with the help of his Holiness, should be able to keep the Emperor out of Italy; yet that should be most for His Holiness is purpose, for His Holiness being excluded from the help and poge of other Princes, should not, amongst themselves same powers of Italy, be in the best case; and thereupon put his Holiness in remembrance how the Venetians have in times past encroached upon the lands of the Church, withholding from the same by force the Cities of Imola and Ravenna and other in Romania, the duchies of Ferrare, Modina, and Regio, the Bentivollis, Bononia, and here by the balions in Peruse, and in diverse other Cities and Sovereigns belonging unto the Church; no the Church was never able to subdue them, but was ever in continual business, inqwietnes, and war, unto such time as other Princes laid to their hands, by Pope Alexander is days, Julii is, and since: and showed His Holiness that the Pope of Rome was never like a Pope till he had the concurrence of other Princes, whereof when so mevyr His Holiness should be totally privy, I said, there was no doubt but that shortly after there should be found many right mean powers in Italy that would plume his feathers, and not set a groat by him; especially the Venetians; of whom His Holiness ought of all men to be ware, for their power should greatly increase by this ways; and by that is passed in other Popis days, men many easily see what they will attempt again when they shall see there time.
  His Holiness said that he saw the inconvenience that might follow by this there Devise many manner of ways; and thanked God who had put him in mind not to follow the same.  And so still His Holiness perseveres  in mind to enter what Leagueso never shall be thought best to the Kings Highness and the Emperor.
  Notwithstanding my thought, His Holiness did declare unto me the Description and Devise aforesaid, to the intent I should write unto your Grace what was proponyd, and whereunto His Holiness might have consented to the impeachment of your affairs; to the intent you should come home the more cause he so did not.  I thought also to advertise your Grace hereof, to the intent that percase the Emperor not now in this great fortune and prosperity know from whens, after God, the said prosperity and fortune common, and deal with the Kings Highness in fulfilling his promises accordingly, your Grace should know what is minded and intended here in Italy and whereunto the Popis Holiness might easily be brought.  Your Grace upon the Emperors unkind demeanor minding the same, assuring your Grace that in my opinion there is nothing that staythe the Popis Holiness in the not entering of this League of . . .  but only the hope and trust which he has in the Kings Highnes to be mean that this Victory in every behalf, concerning the matters of Italy, shall be moderately used.
  As for the matters of France, it should seem that his Holiness reckoned not greatly how you determine them, it is trowghe that by way of devise, His Holiness said unto me lately, out of purpose, these words exempli gra . . they . . . pro bono pacis make the French Kings son King of France, and deputt him a portion as small as they would:  taking the rest as they could agree:  so that by His Holiness meaning, he would have a King in France still, but so plumed that his cooportionars  and other his neighbors might live in rest by him without charge; and by this devise King Frances should end his miserable life in captive; the which thing His Holiness spoke but by the way of devise, showing him self of nothing more desirous than that these cruel wars might shortly, by one means or other, take some good end.
  I do comfort His Holiness still, all that I can, that the Emperor will be now more at his devotion than ever he was: and that the Kings Highness and your Grace will be mean that it so shall be.  I am also mean between the Imperials and His Holiness that they shall make demonstration unto His Holiness accordingly, showing them the jeopardys and inconvenience that may ensue at this present time by their contrary demeanor.  And I do not doubt but your Grace will make demonstration in this case unto the Popis Holiness, according to his good mind ever born towards you, and to the father and trust he has ever had in you, the which demonstration should in such times as they be, cannot be forgotten hereafter.
  The Archbishop of Capua is returned here again since the conflict, and showed me that your Grace reputes him a French man, and that that would you not do if you knew how the French men have evil entreated him:  and . . .  him in France, not in prison, but a hunting . . . gain his will ij months:  which he says . .  a pastime whereunto he was never accustomed in the cloister.  If your Grace would witsaffe to write iij. words to the said Archbishop showing him, what so ever has been written, you do take him for the Kings faithful servant and your lovare, your Grace should greatly comfort him.  The Datarye and he may do all: and therefore it shallbe well done to entertain him, for the Popis nuntio there wrytythe still many mad matters: and of every word your Grace speaks, making tanquam ex musca elephantem.  If orators would they might upon like ocasion fall now and then paper lefis:  I for my part thank it not necessary: and to say the trowgh I have no great occasion so to do.  The Popis Holiness was once determined to have sent the Datary to the Emperor, and the Bishop of Worchester to the Kings Highness, but since his mind is changed, and determined to send to neither, unto such time as his Holiness shall be resolute determined what he will do upon every particular point.  Which thing he says he cannot well do, till he shall have word again from the Emperor; that done, he will send unto both resolutely and perfectly instructed parsons.  My lord of Worchester was on his journey as far as Bononye before he was contremanded.  I have obtained him license, at his desire, to go see the King’s Highness, your Grace, and his bishopriche, in hope that he will do as much for me at his coming unto your Grace: and so he goes forth in his journey fair and softly, and not making speed, for he has no commission as yet.
  The Duke of Albany has been evil handled here amongst the Colonies, who has had many skirmishes with him, and caused him to fly from place to place, and much a do he has had to escape; part of his men were driven hard to Rome gates, and slain ij.C. of them within a mile of the town, and many followed and pursued in to Rome hard to the Popis palace, and of them taken prisoners within a stones cast of the same palace; where at the Pope was very evil discontented.  And I assure your Grace, had it not been, that the Pope has respect, by cause he is within the londis of the Church by the Popis sufferance, and in a manner with safe conduct and promise of safe going and coming as the Emperos men have, I think he had been the Kings Highness prisoner this day.  Wherein I have spared no labors no . . . . tion, no other setting forwards as well to the Popis Holiness; showing unto his Holiness that he sh . . .  so greatly ponder the duke of Albany, who now, . . .  the matters of France being in decay, was not be taken but as an abject parson:  as also  . . .  the colonies offering them large sums of money if they delivered him me.  And I assure your Grace they have somewhat vexed him and his men, but the Pope thinking he came do no less than help to save the Duke for the cause above said, by cause he married his kinswoman; and so the said duke by the Popis means, has licensed his footmen and many of his men of armies. . . .  rest shall take shipping at Civita Vetula her, and so in to France, if the Emperors army at Jean, being warned thereof, do not stop him by the way.  The said Duke is bare of money; he sent hether lately to borrow on C. ducattes of a friend of his, and sped not.  Thus our lord be thanked, the Kings enemies on every side be punished:  a domino factum est istud, et est mirabile in oculis nostris.
  At this present time I come from the Pope, where I learned nothing but that his Holiness should have advise (howbeit of no certainty) that Madame the French Kings mother, is determined to go her self to the Emperor; partly to move, as mother, the more pity in her sons calamity; partly by cause she thinking her self most best skilled to handle and treat this matter with the Emperor.  His Holiness said, that he thought the matter had need of other help, than of women’s tears.  This the almighty god preserve your Grace.  At Rome the     day of March.
  Post script.
  At this present hour I have received your Grace’s Letters of the xxiiij of February, concerning particular matters of certain prelates of Scotland, wherein I shall speak with the Popis Holiness; and procure with diligence, that they may have their full intent according to your Grace’s desire.  As touching the Bishop of Dunkell is matter, I have written unto your Grace thereof in my last Letters, and I am about to get the fryar heir somewhat of the Pope for your sake, that he may resign the pention he has assigned him upon the bishopriche of Dunkell.
  Of the Archibishop of Saint Andrews I have spoken so much evil already, that I . . . go study how I may now conveniently speak w . . . notwithstanding I am glad your Grace has recom ...him, for the Duke of Albany lately was demanded .. on, whom he took for his friend, what he would do now as the World was thus turned; he answered that he would in to France, where he could not lake an honorable entertainment in this great scarcity of noble men and great captains; and after that w . . demanded again what he would do if that entertainment should fail him, as peradventure it might; then the said duke said he would in to Scotland, where he said he had friends, and reckoned the Archbishop of Saint Andrews to be on of the chief.  But it should seem now that me makes his reckoning amiss, and so I will show the Pope; and I am sure his Holiness will be right well contented with all, and make such demonstration in the said Archbishop’s cause that he shall right well know that he farythe nothing the wars for the Kings Highness and your Grace is recommendation:  so, that the said Archbishop shall have greatly to esteem the same.  The Bishop of Dunkell his servant is come; and I do the best I can to help and assist him in his masters causes, according your Grace’s commandment.  I have also received the Kings Letters in recommendation of the Bishop of Murray and the abbey of Paslaye.  The Kings letters for the Archbishop of Saint Andrews I have not yet received, and, amongst a great number of Scotsmen here in the town, here is none that have any commission from the said Archbishop, but favorite rather the Archbishop of Glasco his adversary.
  This the Almighty God preserve your Grace.  At Rome the xix day of March
        Your Grace is humble chaplain and bedman,
              JO. CLERK.

Lady Brian, Governess of the Lady Elizabeth, to Lord Cromwell, from Hunsdon, for Instructions concerning her, after the death of Q. Anne her mother.
unknown
unknown
background: This Letter has been already printed by Stripe, but with a material omission, and in so imperfect a form, that it stands here at least in a more authentic shape.  Unfortunately it suffered much injury in the fire of the Cottonian Library in 1731, so that in a few places the Editor has been obliged to supply the lacunæ.  In this service Stripe’s copy has been called in aid. Queen Elizabeth’s manners when a child, form no uninteresting portion of this Letter.
  My Lord, after my most burden duty, I recommend me to your good Lordship beseeching you to be good Lord to me, now in the greatest need that ever . . . for it has pleased God to take from him that was my most con . . . in this world to my great heavens.  Jesus have mercy on her soul an . . . I am sokerles and as a redles creature both only for the great tr . . . . have in the Kings grace and your good lordship for now in yo . . .  I put all my whole trust of comfort in this world beseeching you to lo . . . me that I may so do.
  My Lord, when your Lordship was last here, it pleased you to say, that I should not mistrust the Kings Grace, nor your Lordship which word was more comfort to me than I can write, as God knows.  And now it boldens me to show you my poor mind.  My Lord, when my Lady Mary Grace was born, it pleased the Kings Grace to appoint me Lady Mistress; and made me a Baroness.  And so I have been am . . . . .  to the Children his Grace have had sense.
  Now it is so, my Lady Elizabeth is put from that degree she was afore:  and what degree she is at now, I know not but be hearing say; therefore I know not how to order her, nor myself, nor none of hers that I have the rule of:  that is, her women & her grooms:  beseeching you to be good Lord to my Lady, & to all hers:  And that she may have some rayment; for she has neither gown nor girdle, nor petticoat, nor no manner of linen for smokes, nor kerchiefs, nor sleeves, nor rayls, nor body-stitches, nor handkerchiefs, nor mufflers, nor begens.  All this her Graces Mostake, I have driven of as long as I can, that, be my trothe, I cannot drive it no longer:  beseeching you, my Lord, that you will see, that her Grace may have that is needful for her, as my Trust is you well do.  Beseeching you, my own good Lord, that I may know from you be writing, how I shall order my self; & what is the Kings Graces pleasure, & yours, that I shall do in everything.  And whatsoever it shall please the Kings Grace, or your Lordship to command me at all times, I shall follow it, to the best of my power.
  My Lord, Mr. Shelton says he is Master of this House:  what fashion that shall be, I cannot tell:  for I have not seen it afore.  My Lord, you be so honorable yourself, & every man reports your Lordship loves honor, that I trust your Lordship will see this House honorably ordered, how some ever it has been aforetime and if it please you, that I may know, what your Order is, & if it be not performed, I shall certify to your Lordship of it.  For I fear me, it will be hardly inow performed, for if the head of . . . . . . . . . .  knew, what honor means, it will be the better ordered:  if not, it will be hard to bring it to pass.
  My Lord, master Shelton would have my Lady Elizabeth to dine & sup every day at the board of Astat.  Alas! my Lord, it is not meant for a child of her age, to keep such rule yet.  I promise you, my Lord, I dare not take it upon me to keep her Grace in health & she keep that rule:  for there she shall see diverse meets & fruits, and wine:  which would be hard for me to refrain her Grace from it.  You know, my Lord, there is no place of correction there.  And she is yet to young to correct greatly.  I know well, & she be there I shall never bring her up to the Kings Graces honor, nor hers; nor to her health, nor my poor honesty.  Wherefore I show your Lordship this my discharge, beseeching you, my Lord, that my Lady may have a mess of meat to her own lodging, with a good dish or two, that is meat for her Grace to eat of:  And the reversion of the mess shall satisfy all her women, a gentleman usher & a groom.  Which been eleven persons on her side.  Sure I am, it will be (in to right little) as great profit to the Kings Grace this way, as the other way.  For if all this should be set abroad, they must have three or four mess of meat, where this one mess shall suffice them all, with bread & drink, according as my Lady Marie Grace had afore; & to be ordered in all things, as her Grace was afore.
  God knows, my Lady has great pain with her great teeth, & they come very slowly forth: & cause me to suffer her Grace to have her will more than I would; I trust to God & her teeth were well graft, to have her Grace after another fashion, than she is yet:  so as I trust the Kings Grace shall have great comfort in her Grace.  For she is as toward a Child, & as gentle of conditions, as ever I knew one in my life.  Jesus preserve her Grace.  As for a Day, or two at a hay team, or whatsoever it shall please the Kings Grace to have her set abroad, I trust so to endeavor me, that she shall so do as shall be to the Kings honor, & hers: and then after to take her ease again.
  I think master Shelton will not be content with this.  He may not know it is my desire; but that it is the Kings pleasure, & yours it should be so.  Good my Lord, have my Ladys Grace & us that be her poor Servants in your remembrance.  And your Lordship shall have our hearty prayers by the Grace of Jesus:  however preserve your Lordship with long life, & as much honor as your noble heart can desire.  From Honsdon with the evil hand of her that is your daily bed-woman.
            MARGET BRYAN.
  I beseech you, my own good Lord, be not miscontent, that I am so bold to write thus to your Lordship.  But I take God to my judge, I do it of true heart, and for my discharge.  Beseeching you, except my good mind.
  To the right noble, & my single good Lord my Lord
  Prive Sel, be this delivered.
  Lord Cromwell to King Henry the Eighth.  A Letter from his Prison in the Tower.
  Most gracious King and most merciful Sovereign, Your most humble most obedient and most bounden subject and most lamentable servant & prisoner, prostrate at the feet of your most excellent Majesty, have heard your pleasure by the mouth of your Comptroller, which was that I should write to your most excellent Highness such things as I thought might to be written concerning my most miserable state and condition; for the which your most abundant goodness, benignite, and license, the Immortal God, Three and On, rewards your Majesty.
  And now most gracious Prince to the matter.  First where I have been accused to your Majesty of Treason, to that I say I never in all my life thought willingly to do that thing that might or should displease your Majesty; and much less to do or say that thing which of it self is so high and abominable offence as God knows, who I doubt not shall rule the truth to your Highness.  My accusers your Grace know; God forgive them.  For as I ever have had love to your honor, person, life, prosperity, health, wealth, Joy, and Comfort, and also your most dear and most eternal beloved son the Prince his Grace, and your proceedings, God so help me in this my adversity; and confound me if ever I thought the contrary; what labors, pains, and trails I have taken according to my most bounden duty God also knows; for if it were in my power as it is Gods to make your Majesty to live ever young and prosperous, God knows I would; if it had been or were in my power to make you so rich as you might enrich all men, God help me as I would do it; if it had been or were in my power to make your Majesty so pusaunt as all the world should be compelled to obey you, Christ he knows I would; for so am I of all other most bound; for your Majesty has been the most bountiful Prince to me that ever was King to his subject; you are more like a dear father, your Majesty not offended, then a master.  Such has been your most grave and godly counsels towards me at sundry times.  In that I have offended I ask you mercy.  Should I now for such exceeding goodness, benygnyte, liberty, & bounty, be your traitor, nay then the greatest payness were to little for me; Should any faction or any affection to any point make me a traitor to your Majesty, then all the devils in hell confound me, and the vengeance of God light upon me, if I should once have thought it.  Most gracious Sovereign Lord to y remembrance I never spoke with the Chauncelor of the Augmentations and Throgmerton together at one time; but if I did I am sure I spoke never of any such matter; and your Grace know what manner of man Throgmerton has ever been towards your Grace, and your proceedings; and what master Chaunceler has been towards me God and he best knows.  I will no can accuse him.  What I have been towards him your Majesty right well know.  I would to Christ I had obeyed your often most gracious grave counsel and advertisements; then it had not been with me as now it is.  Yet our Lord, if it be his will, can do with me as he did with Susan who was falsely accused; unto the which God I have only committed my soul; my body and goods at your majesties pleasure, in whose mercy and piety I do holy repose me; for other hope then in God and your Majesty I have not.  Sir as to your Common wealth I have after my wit, power, and knowledge, traveled herein, having had no respect to persons (your Majesty only except) and my duty to the same; but that I have done any injustice or wrong willfully, I trust God shall bare me witness, and the world not able justly to accuse me.  And yet I have not done my duty in all things as I was bound, wherefore I ask mercy.  If I have heard of any combinations, conventicles, or such as were offenders of your laws I have, though not as I should have done, for the most part revealed them, and also caused them to be punished, not of malice as God shall judge me.  Nevertheless, Sir, I have meddled in so many matters under your Highness, that I am not able to answer them all; but one thing I am well assured of, that wittingly and willingly I have not had will to offend your Highness; but hard it is for me or any other, meddling as I have done, to live under your Grace and your laws but we must daily offend: and where I have offended I most humbly ask mercy & pardon at your gracious will and pleasure.  Amongst other things, most gracious Sovereign, master Comptroller showed me that your Grace showed him that within this xiiij days you committed a matter of great secrecy which I did reveal contrary to your expectations.  Sir I do remember well the matter, which I never revealed to any creature; but this I did, Sir, after your Grace had opened the matter first to e in your Chamber and declared your lamentable fate, declaring the things which your Highness myslykyd in the Queen, at which time I showed your Grace that she often desired to speak with me but I durst not, and you said why should I not, alleging that I might do much good in going to her, and to be playing with her in declaring my mind.  I thereupon lacking opportunity, not being a little grieved, spoke privately with her Lord Chamberlain, for the which I ask your Grace mercy, desiring him, not naming your Grace to him, to find some means that the Queen might be induced to order your Grace pleasantly in her behavior towards you; thinking thereby for to have had some fawtis amended to your Majesties comfort.  And after that, by general words, the said lord Chamberlain and other of the Queens Counsel being with me in my Chamber at Westminster for license for the departure of the strange maidens, I then required them to counsel their masters to use all pleasantness to your Highness, the which things undoubtedly were both spoken before your Majesty committed the secret matter unto me, only of purpose that she might have been induced to such pleasant and honorable fashions as might have been to your Grace’s comfort; which above all things as God knows I did most covet and desire.  But that I opened my mouth to any creature after your Majesty committed the secrecy thereof to me, other than only to my Lord Admiral, which I did by your Grace’s commandment, which was upon Sunday last in the morning, whom I then found as willing and glad to seek remind for your comfort and consolation, and saw by him that he did as much lament your Highness fate as ever did man; and was wonderfully grieved to see your Highness so troubled; wishing greatly your comfort, for the attaining whereof he said, your honor salvaged, he would spend the best blood in his belye, and if I would not do the like, you and willingly die for your comfort, I would I were in hell; and I would I should receive a thousand deaths.  Sir this is all that I have done in that matter and if I have offended your Majesty therein, prostrate at your Majesties feet I most lowly ask mercy and pardon of your Highness.  Sir there was also laid unto my charge at my examination that I had retained contrary to your laws.  Sir, what exposition may be made upon retainers I know not, but this will I say if ever I retained any man but such only as were my household servants, but against my will, God confound me.  But most gracious Sovereign I have been so called on and sewyd to by them that said they were my friends, that constrained thereunto I resayved their children and friends not as retainers, for their fathers & parents did promise to find them, and so took I them not as retainers to my great charge, and for none evil as God best knows, interpret to the contrary who will; most humbly beseeching your Majesty of pardon if I have offended therein.  Sir I do knowledge myself to have been a most miserable and wretched sinner, and that I have not towards God and your Highness behaved my self as I ought and should have done:  for the which my offences to God, while I live, I shall continually call for his mercy; and for my offences to your Grace, which God know were never malicious nor willful, and that I never thought treason to your Highness, your Realm, or Posterity, so God help me, either in word or deed.  Nevertheless, prostrate at your Majesties feet in what thing soever I have offended I appeal to your Highness for mercy, grace, and pardon, in such ways as shall be your pleasure; beseeching the almighty Maker and Redeemer of this World to send your Majesty continual and long health, wealth, and prosperity, with Nestor’s years to reign; and your most dear Son the Prince Grace to prosper, reign, & continue long after you; and they that would contrary, short life, shame, & confusion.  Writing with the quaking hand and most sorrowful heart of your most sorrowful subject and most humble servant & prisoner this Saturday at your of London.
                THOMAS CRUMWELL.

Queen Mary to the Bp. of Winchester, Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, for the restoration of Popery.
unknown
unknown
  Right reverend Father in God, right trusted & right well beloved, we greet you well.  And where among diverse other Inconveniences & Miss orders brought in & set further in that our University of Cambridge, one of the greatest & chief occasion of many of the said Miss orders is, that without sufficient authority, only upon the sensual mindes & rash determinations of a few Men, the ancient Statutes, Foundations, & Ordinances of the whole University, the Colleges & other places of Students, have been much altered, broken, & almost utterly subverted; whereby not only the last Wills of many good men have been broken, & many wise, politic, & godly Ordinances, confirmed by Parliaments & by sundry our Progenitors, fondly & irreverently contempt, but the consciences of many hones men, which by there others were bound to the observation of the said Statutes & Foundations, have been much encumbered, & yought loosely & insolently brought up, to the great discredit of the University, & no small hindrance of the Commonwealth of all our Realm:  We therefore, knowing it our burden duty to Almighty God, by whose only goodness we acknowledge ourselves called & placed in the Royal Estate of this Realm, to travel by all the means we may, that his Glory & holy Will being truly declared to all our Subjects, he may, of all sorts, in their several vocations, be reverently feared, served, & obeyed, have thought good for a beginning, to wish that the examples hereof, my first begin in our Universities, where young men, and all sorts of students, joining godly conversations with their studies in Learning may after, as well by their doings as by their preachings, instruct & confirm the rest of our subjects, both in knowledge & fear of Almighty God, in the due Obedience towards us, our laws, & all others their superiors, & in their charitable demeanor towards all men.  And because we know that when order is not kept, all things grow to confusion, we therefore have thought good to will & require you, our Chauncellour, & all others the Heads & Governors of the Colleges, & other Houses, that both yourselves for your own parts do exercise your offices, & live, & cause all Scholars, Students, Servants & Ministers, with others living under you, of what sort, state or condition so ever their be, to live, & frame themselves, their studies, conversations & manner of living, in such form & order, as by the ancient Statutes, Foundations & Ordinances of that our University, & of the Colleges, & others, is to you severally appointed, which Statutes & Foundations, we will to be inviolable kept & observed, according to the ancient Foundations & Ordinances of the Founders, & Grants of our Progenitours; & therefore do eftesones require & charge you our Chauncellour, whom we do authorize by these presents, for that purpose, to see the same well & truly observed, as you will answer for the contrary, Notwithstanding any Injunctions, or new Ordinances made, set further, or delivered by any Visitors or others, since the death of our Father of most worthy memory King Henry the eighth, (whom God assoyle) or any other new devices to the contrary hereof.  Given under our signet at our manner of Richmond this xxth. of August, the first year of our Reign.

Archbishop Parker to Sir William Cecil, concerning the foundation of a Grammar School at Sandwich in Kent.  A. D. 1563.
unknown
unknown
  Where of late, I made a request by letters, to your honor, for the obtaining of the Counsels letters in that cause opened unto you:  now I would be a suitor to the Queens majesty, by your favorable furtherance, for the behalf of the Town of Sandwich, concerning her Highness license, as well to the Dean and Chapter for their alienation, or rather a lease in fee farm of a rude acre of ground belonging to their Church, whereon the town would build a grammar School:  Mr. Manwood being so well disposed thereto, that he is fully determined to give to that foundation xx. li. by year imperpetuum of his own possessions presently.  The Dean and Chapter (whom I have particularly solicited) be well willing of their grant, staying only at the queens license:  the Town itself wholly bent to the erection:  Mr. Manwood his land ready for assurance.  The opportunity being such, I doubt not of the Queens Majesties good and gracious assent: as I have learned by experience by my own suit to her highness, for the recovery of the stipend of the Schoolmaster at Stoke college; perceiving then her godly zeal to the furtherance of learning, yes in that case, where the Stipend went out of her own coffers.  This rare example of so godly foundation in Mr. Manwood, a man of his vocation, who be commonly judged rather to employ all their abilities to their own posterities, then to such common respects; and he being not without issue, (and is daily like to have more) might have followed the common example, in leaving the gains of his time to his offspring.  And therefore I would wish his purpose were savored, both for example to others, as also to put away the common judgment which runs upon such as be of his calling.  I take it to be a motion of God, in consideration that we poor Bishops be now able to succeed our predecessors in their so liberal foundations.  Now you, such as you be and as Mr. Manwood is, must lay hand to the furtherance of such public endowments, or else you be not like to leave to your Successors which you have received of your Ancestors.
  For that I would have a view partly of the ground and situation thereof, (and for other causes) I (this last Sunday morning) rode farther from my house, and was there by vij. of the clock; the rather so soon, to prevent their civility of receiving, (as the manner is) and partly to be present at their whole Service.  But in the first consideration they prevented me:  for, though the morning was very foul and rainy, yet I found the Mayor and his Jurattes ready at the town gate to accompany me to my lodging, and so to the church, being men of honest civility, and comely, grave parsonages of good understanding:  their streets (as they might be for the straightness of them) clean, and not much savagery, their service song in good distinct harmony, and quiet devotion.  The singing men, being the Mayor and the Jurattes with the head men of the town, placed in the choir fair and decent, in so good order as I could wish.  My Auditory great and attentive to hear, and also to understand the Queens pleasure in publication of the General Prayer and Fast: that I see not but the Queens majesty shall have of them good subjects & true Orators.  And furthermore, upon the erection of this School; her Highness shall have a number of young tender hands lift up in prayer for her Highness prosperous Reign.  The Strangers there, being very godly in the Sabbath day, and busy in their work on the week day, and their quietness such as the Mayor and his Brethren have no causes of variances coming before them.  As for other disorders reformable by ecclesiastical laws, I have before now deputed their Minister (a grave learned man) to exercise (by my authority) ecclesiastical censures as he shall see cause.  As hitherto little has been spied.  By all the premises aforesaid considered, I mean to commend the Towns request to the Queens favor, so laudable behaving themselves as I see them, and partly to express to you somepart of my joy which I have here by them in this outward corner of my diocess.  And therefore, I pray your Honor help them.  In so doing mercedem reportabis a Domino in resurrectione justorum, which God of his mercy make joyful to the Queen Highness and to us all.  From my house at Bekesbourne this xxvijth. day of August 1563.
            Your honors assured,
              MATTHUE CANTUAR.
  To the right honorable Sir William Cecil knight principal Secretary to the Queens majesty at the Court.

Christopher Jonson, Master of Winchester School, to Sir William Cecil, upon the perverseness of Rich.  Lyllington, one of his Scholars.
unknown
unknown
  The unceasing employ of Sir William Cecil’s mind while Secretary of State, can only be known to those whose researches lead them to the documents of his time.  From the question of Peace or War down to a regulation for the lining of slop-house; from quarrels at court to the bickering between a schoolmaster and his scholar; from the arrest of a Peer to the punishment of a cutpurse; all was reported to him, and by all parties in turn was his favor craved. Christopher Jonson, the writer of this Letter, became master of Winchester School in 1560.  Wood, in his Athenæ Oxonienses, describes him as a Latin poet, a philosopher, and  a physician.  He did not remain master of Winchester School for a great many years; but settled in London, and practiced as a physician in the parish of St. Dunstan in the West, where he died in 1597.
  Right honorable my duty with all humbleness considered:  I received of late your honors Letters in the behalf of one Richard Lyllington a scholar of mine: who if he had not spared the truth at his last being with your Honor, I am persuaded you would have spared his commendations unto me; not because I am not willing to obey your commandment either herein or in any other matter, but because I presume, of your justice and wisdom, that you would not willingly defend any such. The whole matter is thus, as at all times I ever found him very tumultuous and disobedient, so a little before his repair to your Honor, a pillage being committed amongst my scholars, and the suspicion falling vehemently upon him (beside his own confession) I happened to challenge him for the same; but he choosing rather to be expelled, as he said, then corrected for his fault, drove his knife at me which he had for the purpose provided, and standing at ward against me and our Subwarden, showed such an example of stubbornness to my scholars as these twenty years I have not heard the like.  Notwithstanding being apprehended and punished for this disorder, the same day he departed the College without license, but with such a threatening stomach, by report, as that I was advertised by my friends to beware of his secret malice.  The next time I saw him, he brought your Honors Letters; upon the sight whereof I received him again, though I perceived he had glossed altogether with you.  Since that time hitherto, he has continued in such overthwartness, as (were it not for your Honors sake) neither I nor the College could bear him.  That which we do in suffering his evil rule, I fear will prove to the animating of others farther than good order can abide.  This I beseek your honor consider of, and pardon me if toward such I discharge my vocation.  From the College by Winchester, the xvijth. of Msay.
          Your honors most due to command
            CHRISTOFER JONSON.

Edwin Sandys bishop of London to Lord Burghley, upon the News of the Massacre of St. Bartholomew.  Recommends measures for safety, with the BEHEADING of the Queen of Scots.
unknown
unknown
background: Lord Clarendon calls fifteen hundred and seventy-two “that infamous year,” from the barbarous and inhuman Massacre of Paris which took place in it, more usually, from the day on which the transaction occurred, called the Massacre of St. Bartholomew.  An event, he observes, attended and accompanied with as foul dissimulation and as horrid perjury as ever added deformity to wickedness. The Reader who would learn the minute particulars of this detested Tragedy may consult Davila’s History of the Civil Wars of France, the Memoirs of Margaret Queen of Navarre, the Memoirs of Sully, the Life of Theodore Agrippa d’Aubignè, Thuanus, Meze3ray’s History of France, Wraxhall’s History of the House of Valois, and Lingard’s narrative in a Note at the end of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. The Massacre of Paris was subsequently repeated in other towns.  Lingard has assembled the Dates; at Paris August the 24th; Meaux the 25th; La Charité, 26th; Orleans, 27th; Saumur and Angers,, 29th; Lyons, 30th; Troyes, September the 2d; Bourges, the 11th; Rouen, 17th; Romans, 20th; Toulouse, the 23d; Bourdeaux, October the 3d. The numbers of those who perished, and neither age nor sex were spared, are variously reckoned by different writers, from ten to a hundred thousand: but should we take the half of the lowest number, the deed loses nothing of its atrocity. It was the Editor’s first intention to have given all he could have found upon this Massacre, but the Correspondence was too long for the limits of his Work.  Much relating to it will be seen in Digge’s compleat Ambassador, although the Letters are imperfectly printed, and some of them have wrong dates. The Editor here contents himself with a single Letter, from Edwin Sandys bishop of London; from which, and from other Letters, it appears that the horror of this deed led even good men to fear that nothing but strong measures could prevent massacre from spreading through all parts of Protestant Europe.  The present Letter is evidence also that the first thought of beheading the Queen of Scots arose out of the panic of this very massacre, although four fourteen years the thought did not ripen into execution. Pope Gregory the Thirteenth had no sooner notice of this deed than he went in solemn procession to the Church of St. Louis in Rome, to return God thanks for it as for a happy victory, and sent a nuncio to France to congratulate the King.  Lord Clarendon thought that Gregory alone paid his devotions for it; but in France its anniversary was long celebrated.  William Cecil, writing to his grandfather Lord Burghley from Paris, 25th Aug. 1583, says, “Upon St. Bartelmewes day, we had here solemn Processions, and other tokens of triumphs and joy, in remembrance of the slaughter committed this time eleven years past.  But I doubt they will not so triumph at the day of Judgment.”
  These evil times trouble all good mens heads, and make their heart sake, fearing that this barbarous treachery will not cease in France, but will reach over unto us.  Neither fear we the mangling of our body, but we sore dread the hurt of our Head: for therein consists our life and safety.  We shall dutifully praise.  Give you good advise.  And God, I trust, will deliver us out of the mouth of the warring Lyon.  The Citizens of London in these dangerous days had need prudently to be dealt withal; the preachers appointed for the Cross in this vocation are but young men, unskillful in matters political, yet so carried with zeal that they will enter into them and pour further their opinions.  If the league stands firm betwixt her Majesty and the French King, (as I suppose it does,) they may perhaps, being not directed, utter speech to the breach thereof.  How that will be liked of I doubt.  If I may receive from your Lord some direction or advise herein, I will not fail to direct them so well as I can.  The Dean of Pauls and I will first occupy the place, giving example how others may follow.  Sundry have required a public Fast and Prayer to be had, for the confounding of these and other cruel enemies of Gods gospel; but this I will not consent unto, without warrant from Her Majesty.  Thus am I bold to unfold a piece of my mind on the sudden, and to make you pertaker of my simple cogitations, knowing that according to your old wont, you will take the same in good part.  Hasten her Majesty homeward, her safe return to London will comfort many hearts oppressed with fear.  God preserve you, and direct you with his spirit to counsel to his glory.  In haste from my house at Fulham this vth. of September 1572.
        Your Lords humble at commandment.
            ED. LONDON.

The safety of our Queen and Realm, if God will.
unknown
unknow
  1.  For with to CUT OF the SCOTTISH QUEEN’S heade:  ipsa est nostri fundi calamitas.
  2.  To remove from our Queen Papistes, and such as by private persuasion overthrow good counsel.
  3.  The Queen’s Majesty to be guarded strongly with Protestants, and others to be removed.
  4.  Order must be taken for the safe keeping of the Tower, and for good order to be had in London for strengthening of the City, and that they receive no Papistes of strength to sojourn there this winter.
  5.  A firm League to be made with the young Scottish King and the Protestant there.
  6.  A League to be made with the Princes Protestants of Germany, offensive and defensive.
  7.  The chief Papistes of this realm are to be shut up in the Tower, and the popishe old Bishops to be returned thither.
  8.  The Gospel earnestly to be promoted, and the Church not burdened with unnecessary ceremonies.
  9.  The Protestants, which only are faithful subjects, are to be comforted, preferred, and placed in authority, the Papistes to be displaced.
      These put in execution, would turn to God’s glory, the safety of
    the Queen’s Majesty and make the Realm flourish and stand.
  To the right honorable my singular good Lord the Lord of Burghley, high Treasurer of England.

The Earl of Sussex to the Lord Treasurer, upon the Queen’s wish to sign a Commission to execute by martial Law.
unknown
unknown
background: Camden, in his History of Queen Elizabeth, explains the intention of this Letter.  He says, “Whether I should here make mention of the frantic Opinion of Peter Burchet, I know not, who persuaded himself that it was lawful to kill such as opposed the truth of the Gospel.  So far had the error of this opinion transported him, that he drew his dagger upon Hawkins that famous sea-captain in the open street and wounded him, supposing him to be Hatton, who was then in great favor with the Queen, and of her Privy Council, whom he had heard to be an enemy to the Innovaters.  The Queen was so extraordinarily incensed with this fact, that she commanded the man to be presently executed by martial or camp-law, until she was informed by discreet persons that martial-law was not to be used but in camps, or in turbulent times; but that at home and in time of peace, the proceeding must be by form of judiciary process.  Being therefore indicated, he affirmed that what he had done was consonant to the holy Scriptures, and therefore lawful.  Whereupon being to be condemned of heresy, he promised to renounce his opinion; but yet he shifted it off, and would not.  Then being thrown into the Tower of London, he slew one of his keepers with a billet which he snatched up out of the chimney, knocking him on the head; for which he was condemned of murder, had his right hand cut off and nailed to the gallows, and then was hanged, discovering a silent reluctancy.”
  The Queen sat in the great Closet or Parlor.  She gave order to Mr. Secretary to bring to her the Commission for executing by marshal law to be signed at after dinner.  God put into her heart to do the best.  My Lord Admiral is greatly grieved with the speech that he should advise it, and is directly against it.  He told my Lord of Leicester of the execution done in London in the Rebellion of Wyatt, but he never told it to the Queen.  My Lord of Arundell is very vehement against it in speech to me.  The Queen asked for your Lordship, and seemed to look for you; being her birth it was holiday.  I told her the Judges did sit this day in the Exchequer, and in Westmester Hall, which it seemed she knew not before.  What will become of these acts at after dinner your Lordship shall her this night.  As I was at dinner, 28th October 1573.
            Your L. assured
              T. SUSSEX.
  To the right honorable & my very good L. the L. High Treasurer of England.

William Fleetwood, Recorder of London, to Lord Burleigh, on the manner of tanning Leather in the reign of Queen Elizabeth in different parts of England.
unknown
unknown
background: Some Observations on the Statute for Tanners, in the 5th of Elizabeth, occur in the Lansdowne volume, Num. 5. art. 58.  Whence it appears that of fifteen clauses only six could be kept, the rest were to be dispensed with, chiefly from the circumstance of the framers of the Act being totally ignorant of the Tanner’s art.
  Right honorable and my very good Lord, according to your Lordships order prescribed by your honorable letters I have conferred with certain persons of good calling and skill upon these Articles exhibited by certain Tanners, the which, though they be many and long, yet the principal griefs do consist in the first and the xth article: the one for the lymyng, the other for raising.  My Lord, such as I conferred with were of opinion against all these articles; and then I sent for a Tanner before us, who indeed did agree with many of the said articles; but my Lord, although my skill in tanning of Leather be small, yet for these xiij. years I have given my mind that way to understand of that faculty.  My wifes mother in Buckinghamshire was married unto a Tanner, whose name was William Howse of West Wickham; he died at Christmas last; he was lxxiiij. years of age; a man both of great wealth, very wise, and most skillful in his art; and such a one as made the best leather in this land, and sold it best cheap.  His desire was to serve the poor, and help young beginners.  He was a virtuous man.  My Lord he told me unto the time of his death, always, that it was impossible to make good leather according to the words of the law, and wished many times of God that the Law might be reformed.  And further my Lord I have viewed myself all the Tan-houses between Norham castle and Dover castle, and the most part of North Wales, and so up to Norwich, and I find that every country in tanning of Leather does vary one from an other: and yet they make, or, if they list can make very good leather.  It is hard to cause a Northern Tanner, or any other in his old days, to learn a new order of Tanning: and surely one form of Tanning can not be used in all places.  The Somersetshire hide being of a red heare will never make half so good leather as will the Derbyshire hide.  The Middlesex hide is not so good as the Vale hide, the which vale is within xxti miles of Middlesex.  The hides of most Countries do differ.  The waters do differ.  In some places the waters are too sharp and piercing, the which an ignorant Tanner does not discern.  The chalk waters of Chilton hills has no fellow.  Some never lime their hides, but work off the heare with strength of men, and that will be excellent leather.  My Lo. the house of Ashen bark drunk, is an extreme purgacion: even so it opens the raw hide, and does marvelous raise or puff it up.  The house of the Oken bark dronke, is the extremest binder that can be found in phisicke; and even so it binds the leather, the which is commendable.  All the excellency and conning of a Tanner consists in the skillful making of his house: surely they must be many and several, and one stronger than an other.  The time of the changing of the Leather from one house to another must be times at prescribed hours, or else the leather will be utterly spoiled.  My Lo. there be an infinite number of ruls to be observed in Tanning, the which few Tanners did ever conceive; much less the Parliament who conceived their information of such whom now I do by experience know not to be skillful.  My Lo. in February last the Tanners whose names be written under this bill of Articles set down these Articles for a remembrance to be provided for at the next Parliament.  Surely My Lo. I, amongst others unworthy, did argue with them, and found most of them very simple men in their Arte.  Wherefore my good Lo. if a toleration might be made by your Lordships good means until the Parliament come, I think it would do much good.  But surely I see not how Leather can become the better cheap, for here is a License much spoken of in London that men say is the only cause of the derthe.  Thus most humbly I take my leave of your good Lordship; this first of June 1575.
          Your good Lordships most bounden,
            W. FLETEWOOD,
              Recorder.
  To the right honorable and my very good Lord Treasurer of England.

Walter Earl of Essex to the Lord Treasurer, offering his eldest son to be married to his Lordship’s daughter.
unknown
unknown
  My very good Lord, because I have ever found in your lordship such love and favor towards me as I cannot any were fully require, I have therefore resolved to make you the offer of the most sufficient pledge of my good will, namely of the direction, education, and marriage of many eldest son whom if you can like to match with your daughter I will presently assure him two thousand marks per year in England, besides my houses, domains, and parks, I will give to your lordship one hundred pounds or two hundred marks by year for his education, I will assure to your daughter five hundred pounds by year in jointure, and, upon the marriage, depart with a convenient portion for their maintenance during my life; if at years of discretion the match shall not go forward, I will give to the gentelwoman to her marriage two thousand pounds.  And thus much in the behalf of my son.  From myself you shall most assuredly look and ever find as firm and constant friendship as your lordship shall receive by any other alliance in England; to all which points I gage my honor and faith, and have testified the like to the bearer to be uttered to your lordship as I do now also confirm it with my hand and seal.  Their is equality sufficient in their years, no great distance in neighbor between Tiboldes and Bonington, such an occasion might make me like well of my lands in Essex, where if God send me life I might hereafter show all offices of friendship to the good Countess your daughter, of whose match I mistrust not but your lordship shall in the end receive singular comfort.  Your lordship sees how open & plain I am; use me as it shall please you: and so with my most hearty commendations to my lady I take my leave.  At Knockfergus the first of November 1573
          at your lordships commandment
              W. ESSEX.
  To the right honorable my very good lord the lord Burleighe Lord Treasurer of England.

Edmund Bishop of Peterborough to Lord Burghley; upon the state of his Diocese, and the unruliness of the Puritans in it.
unknown
unknown
  My most humble commendations unto your honor premised, &c.  My very good Lord, I most entirely, in the name of Christ Jesus, beseech you (in whom under God and my prince is my only trust and stay) vouchsafe among your other cares of the state of this Realm to look upon these sheires of Northampton and Rutlande, committed in spiritual government unto me.  And for because God has blessed your counsels and devises ever to the wealth of this Realm, let it not grieve you to aid me with your counsel for the better discharge of my office, and peace of the country.  I am, without Gods assistance and yours, very weak and unable to execute and discharge the same in these troubles, now moved and procured by those whom men do call Puritans and their fautors.  They are grown apparently to neglect, if they do not abhor the divine service set out by public authority.  So that in the Town of Overston where Mr. Carleton dwells, there is no devine service upon most Sundays and holidays, according to the book of Commen Prayer, but in steed thereof ij sermons be preached most commonly by Mr. Standen, and one Mr. King, men for their opinions not licensed by me to preach at this day.  When they are determined to receive the communion they repair to Whiston, where it is their joy to have many owte of diverse parishes, principally out of Northampton Towne and Ovedrston aforesaid, with other towns thereabout, there to receive the sacraments with preachers and ministers to their own liking, and contrary to form prescribed by the public order of the Realm; which breeds in my opinion great scisme and division, with grudge and mallice among the people, so that I am doubtful, that further evil will ensue thereof.  To their purposes they have drawn diverse young ministers, to whom it is plausable to have absolute authority in their parrishes.  In their ways there be very bold and stout, like men that seem not to be without great friends.  Whoso stands against them, they seek to molest by some means, as lately my chauncellor, whom by endytementes very much, and yet more by clamors and reproaches openly in the face of the country the disquietted, professing not to be satisfied by any other means but by his departure out of the country; which, no doubt of it, would make well of their side and for their purpose, for if men by voices and clamors might be removed out of the way, which withstand their unlawful doings, I doubt not but that there will shortly have friends inowe, and few to resist their attempts.  I write not this to defend my chauncellor, if they be able justly before discreet and indifferent Judges to find him culpable, so that I would not have him to escape dew correction according to the quantity and quality of his fault; but I would be loath to have him permitted and given over ever to their pleasures.  And glad I would be that indifferent judges might have the hearing both of his adversaries offences and of his; before whom I trust he shall be found either in no fault at all, or else in such fault only as may well obtain forgiveness; if it be otherwise it shall not greave me, so that he suffer not more than he has deserved.  In this my chauncellores case I have to crave some aid to bring it to the just trial of the wise, as in my own causes aforesaid, I stand in great need of some direction from you, for since they are increased and waxen bold when I and my officers have been to resist them, much further will they proceed if I be destitute of a chauncellor.  When some of them have offended, I am written unto by those whose letters in mild words be unto me rather a commandment than a request.  Therefore I beseech you, as before I have done, to relieve me with some part of your counsel.  I would not thus trouble you, my good Lord, if this matter touched not as much the peace and quietness of the Laietie, as it does the regiment of the Spirituality; wherefore I beseech you pardon me, if in this anxiety and doubtfulness I fly unto you for advise.  At Peterborough this xiijt. of April 1573
          Your honors at commandment in the Lord Jesus
              EDMUNDE PETRIBURG.
  To the Right honorable my very good Lord, the Lord Treasurer of England.

Father Sanders the Jesuit, to the Catholic Nobility and Gentry of Ireland, to stir them to Rebellion.
unknown
unknown
  Camden has given an account of the expedition which in 1579 carried Father Sanders to Ireland.  He says, “In Munster, a Province of Ireland, James Fitz-Morris raised a new rebellion; the same James which a while before, falling upon his knees before Perott President of Munster, had with lamentable howlings and humble entreaties begged his pardon, and most religiously vowed his fidelity and obedience to the Queen.  This man (who was never well but in troubles) had withdrawn himself into France, promising the King that if he would assist him, he would unite all Ireland to the Sceptre of France, and restore the Romish religion in that Isle.  But being wearied out with delays and in the end laughed at, he went from France into Spain, and made the same promises to the Catholic King.  The King sent him over to the Bishop of Rome; from whom having (at the earnest solicitation of Sanders an English priest, and Allen an Irish one, both of them Doctors in Divinity) gotten a little money, the authority of a Legate granted to SANDERS, a consecrated banner, and letters of recommendation to the Spaniard, he returned into Spain, and from thence arrived about the first day of July, WITH THOSE TWO DIVINES, three ships, and a small body of men, at Saint Mary Wick (which the Irish contractedly call Smerwick) in Kerry, a peninsula in Ireland, where in a place solemnly consecrated by the Priests, he erected a Fort, and drew up his ships close under: which ships Thomas Courtney an English gentleman, who lay by chance at anchor with a man of war in a road hard by, soon after set upon, took, and carried away, and deprived the Spaniards of the benefit of the Sea.” One of the original printed Indulgences granted by the Pope on this occasion to those who should join the Irish rebels, preparatory to the expedition, is still preserved in the same Volume of the Lansdowne Collection with Father Sanders’s Letter; and bears date in 1577.  It is endorsed in Lord Burghley’s hand, “Bulla contra Reginam.  For JAM. FITZ-MORIS.”  It has at the bottom, a wafer Seal of one of the Cardinals, and is further attested by one of the apostolic Notaries.  The Letters J. H. S. at the beginning, have the Cross above and the Nails below, encircled with a Glory.
  Pits, who was related to Father Sanders, places his death in 1581.  Camden, in 1583.  Whether he perished of cold and hunger, or died of disease is uncertain. To the right honorable and Catholic Lords and Worshipful Gentlemen of Ireland, N. Sander D. of Divinity wishes all felicity. Pardon me, I beseech you, if upon just cause I use the same words to your Honors and Worships which S. Paule wrote sometime to the Galatians: ‘Who has enchanted you, not to obey the Truth?’ for if you be not bewitched, what mean you to fight for hearsay against the true faith of Christ, for the Devil against God, for Tyrans that rob you of your goods, lands, lives, and everlasting salvation, against your own brethren, who daily spend their goods and shed their blood to deliver you from these miseries?  What mean you I say, to be at so great charges, to take so great pains, and to put yourselves in so horrible danger of body and soul, for a wicked Woman, neither begotten in true wedlock nor esteeming her christendom, and therefore deprived by the Vicar of Christ, her and your lawful judge; forsaken of God who justifies the sentence of his Vicar; forsaken of all Catholic Princes whom she has injuried intolerably; forsaken of diverse Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of England, who ten years past took the sword against her, and yet stand in the same quarrel?  See you not that she is without a lawful heir of her own body, who may either reward her friends or revenge her enemies?  See you not that she is such a shameful reproach to the royal Crown, that who so is indeed a friend to the Crown should so much the more hasten to dispossess her of the same?  See you not that the next Catholic heir to the Crown (for the Pope will take order by God’s grace that it shall rest in none other but Catholics) must account all them for traitors that spend their goods in maintaining an heretike against his true title and right?  What will you answer to the Pope’s Lieutenant when he bringing us the Popes and other Catholic Princes aid (as shortly he will) shall charge you with the crime and pain of heretiks, for maintaining an heretical pretense Queen against the public sentence of Christ’s vicar?  Can she with her fine Supremacy (which the Devil instituted in Paradise, when [he] made Eve Adams mistress in Gods matters) absolve and acquiet you from the Pope’s excommunication and curse?  Shall you not rather stay yourselves and your noble Houses with the suspicion of Hearsay and Treason? in which case if the Catholic heir to the royal Crown call upon the execution of the Laws of the Church, you shall for the maintenance of hearsay loose your goods, your lands, your honors, and undo your wives, your children, and your Houses forever.  God is not mocked.  The longer it is before he punish, the more hard and severe shall his punishment be.  Do you not see before your eyes that because King Henry the Eighth broke the Unity of Christ’s Church his House is now cut off, and ended? and think you that maintaining the Hearsay which he began, you shall not bring your own houses to the like end that his has?  Mark likewise Sir William Druries end, who was the General against the Pope’s army, and think not our part to weak, seeing God fights for us.  And surely whereas we had once both money, men, and armor to begin this battle withall; God, by most strange means (which to recite in this place it were to tedious) took them all from us, and sent us hether in manner naked, to the end it should be evident unto all the World that this war is not the war of man (which is always most pursuant in the beginning as most Armies, begun with greater power then afterward it is maintained,) but the War of God, who of small beginnings works wonderful end.  Whom I beseech to open your eyes, that, whiles time is, you may openly confess and honor him more than Heretikes.  The xxj. of Feb. 1580.

B. C. an English Spy to his Government upon the preparation of the Spanish Armada.
Madrid 
28 May 1588.
  My last was out of this town of the last of April which I sent by way of Italy, not having better commodity for the place and time, which, presently, is full suspicions.  This do I send by the way of Lion, which perhaps may arrive before the other.  My Journey into Portugal, and the money I left to one there, cost me much, as in my former I wrote; since which I have had more particular advises as herein I send you.  And although I judge this Navy (now in a readiness under the castle of Belem expecting wind to set sail) may be in your quarters before these come to your hands, yet would I omit no occasion to write, saying that where heretofore I was in the number of the incredulous, yet now being in place where I may here and see, I confess to be in the wrong; for now I am out of doubt they will in very did that way: so that the Lightening and Thunder clap will be both in a moment.
  From Dunkirk is lately come to Lisbon a small ship with good speed, having passed in vij days; she brings from the Duke of Parma certain pilots for the conduct of this Army, and says that upon all the coast of our land she never saw one sail, and further avows that the said Duke much solycytethe the departure of the Armata.  The news here from Constantinople are, and that duplicate, how Ebrami Bassha, general of the seas, is to issue with a hundred galleys, and that these Governors of Thunis, Tripoli, and Algier, with others of the coast of Barbary, have in readiness fifty more to join with him; whereby is expected great spoils upon the coasts of this King’s dominions; to the best remedy whereof that presently may be, is ordained horsemen, and the prince made general of those seas puts in order eighty galleys to follow and to annoy them; accounting that in October they must of force retire.
  About xvj months ago was taken a Youth entringe Spain our of France, about Fontarabie, who has given out his person to be begotten between our Queen and the Earl of Leicester; born at Hampton court, and further with by the eldeer Assheley delivered into the hands of one Southern the servant to Mrs. Assheley, with charge upon pain of death that the said Southern should not reveal the matter, but bring it up; who brought the babe to a millers wife of Mowlsey to give it suck, and afterwards the said Southern going into his country which was Wurcester or Shropshier, carried with him the child, and there brought it up in learning and qualities.  In the end, discovering unto this youth the whole secret, he took a flight over seas, where many years he has remained until his coming here.  His name is Arthur, and of xxvij years of age, or there about.  This forsoothe is his saying, and takes upon him like to the man he pretends to be; whereupon he wanted no keepers, and is very solemnly warded and served, with an expence to this King of vj crowns a day.  If I had my Alphabet I would say more touching his lewd speeches; and if I may I will do him pleasure, especially being called to account about him, as it is told me I shall shortly be; the king being informed that about that time I served in Court, whereby I may say somewhat to this matter.
  Here in this town and country are great prayers, processions, fastings, and almes, for the happy success of this Armata, in this cause of God now more than ever in hand.  I hope you there will join with us here in heart and spirit in such sort as ones we may meet at home with the sure enjoying of the true catholic religion in our country; whereof we may now the better hope, seeing our Queen is said here to have sent Batson the Ihesuyte to Rome about overture with his Holiness to be reconciled, which God grant, and always preserve you.  Madrid the xxviijth of May 1588.
                Yours to use.
                  B. C.

The Queen to the Marquis of Winchester and the Earl of Sussex, Lieutenants of the County of Southampton, TO PREPARE AGAINST INVASION.
unknown
unknown
background: By the Queen.
    ELIZABETH R.
  Right trusty, and right well beloved cousins we greet you well.  Whereas heretofore upon the advertisements, from time to time and from sundry places, of the great preparations of foreign forces, made with a full intent to invade this our Realm and other our dominions, we gave our directions unto you for the preparing of our Subjects within your Lievetennauncies to be in readiness for defense against any attempt, that might be made against us and our Realm, which our directions we find so well performed, that we cannot but receive great contentment thereby, both in respect of your careful proceedings therein, and also of the great willingness of our people in general, to the accomplishment of that whereunto they were required.  Showing thereby their great love, and loyalty towards us, which as we accept most thankfully at their hands, acknowledge ourselves infinitely bound to Almighty God, in that it has pleased him to bless us with so loving and dutiful Subjects: so would we have you make it known unto them on our behalf, forasmuch as we find the same intention not only of invading, but of making a conquest also of this our Realm, now constantly more and more detected, and confirm as a matter fully resolved on (an Army being already put to the Seas for that purpose which we doubt not but by gods goodness, shall prove frustrate), we have therefore thought meet, to will, and require you forthwith, with as much convenient speed as you may, to call together at some convenient place or places the best sort of gentlemen under your Lievetennancie, and to declare unto them that considering these great preparations and arrogant threatnings now burst out in action upon the Seas, tending to a conquest, wherein every mans particular state is in the highest degree to be touched, in respect of Country, Liberty, Wife, Children, lands, life, and that which specially to be regarded, for the profession of the true and sincere Religion, of Christ; and laying before them the infinite and unspeakable miseries, that follow upon any such accident and change (which miseries are evidently seen by the fruits of the hard and cruel government that is holden in Countries not far distant, where such change does happen, whatsoever pretence is otherwise given forth for the cause of Religion) we do look that the most part of them should have, upon this instant extraordinary occasion a larger proportion of furniture, both for horsemen and footmen (but especially horsemen) then have been certified, thereby to be in their best strength against any attempt what soever, and to be employed both about our own person and otherwise, as they shall have knowledge given unto them, the number of which larger proportion as soon as you shall know, we require you to signify to our privy Counsel, hereunto as we doubt not but by your good endeavors, they will be the rather conformable, So all so we assure ourselves, that Almighty God will be bless their loyal hearts born towards us their loving Sovereign and their natural Country, that all the attempts of any enemies whatsoever shall be made voiced and frustrate, to their confusion, your comforts, and to Gods high glory.  Given under our signet at our manor of Greenwich the xviijth. day of June 1588, in the xxxth. year of our Reign.
                  WINCHESTER.

Thomas Wilson, to Sir Thomas Parry at Paris.  The State of England immediately after King James’s Accession.
Greenwich
June 12, 1603
  Our English affairs go on with a smooth pace and a smiling countenance, God grant them good continuance.  Our virtuous King makes our hopes to swell.  His actions suitable to the time and his natural disposition.  Sometimes he comes to Counsel, but most time he spends in Fields and Parks and Chases, chasing away idleness by violent exercise and early rising, wherein the Sun seldom prevents him.  The people according to the honest English nature approve all their Prince’s actions and words, saving that they desire some more of that gracious affability which there good old Queen did afford them.  He is at the present at Windsor having viewed all his houses, and at that he purpose to entertain his Queen and Son, who about fourteen days hence are there expected. For matters de facto, domestic, I shall not write much till the Coronation and Parliament be past.  Only, for gaining the love of the People there are many things in the meanwhile done, as taking away of all Monopolies, and other matters reformed where private gain has caused public grievance.  Our merchants which trade for Levant have on Sunday last given over their patent, and the King has released their yearly pension of 4000l. per annum.
    Your Lordship’s most devoted and affectionate in all service or command,
              THO. WILSON.

Nicholas Charles to Sir Robert Cotton, upon the Creation of the new Nobility called Baronets.
unknown
unknown
Sir Oliver Lambert, says Betham, having reduced the Province of Ulster in Ireland, the King, in order to preserve it in subjection, and to encourage a plantation therein by the English, instituted the hereditary dignity of Baronet, May 11th. 1611.  The persons upon whom this honor was bestowed engaging singly to maintain thirty foot soldiers in Ireland for three years, at the rate of eight pence English by the day; and to pay the first year’s wages into the Exchequer at one payment, upon passing their patents; which, with fees of honor, amounted to near Twelve Hundred Pounds. With the precise circumstances of the discussion alluded to in the present Letter, the Editor is unacquainted.
  Right worshipful Sir, my duty remembered, I have made bold to trouble you with this Script, containing some of the occurrences and business of the Baronettes since your going out of town.  The matter has been heard on both sides, wherein by the Baronettes was showed the promiscuous using of Baronett and Bannarett, and their proofs held for little and nothing worth, being accounted Monkish Stories; and so made but a mistake in all ages.  Withal it was urged that if they could show a Baronett made formerly, and afterward corruptly called a Bannarett, that then it were a good instance to prove them all one.  This and some other such like arguments, too long to be written, were used of either part on two several days of hearing, and the last day it seemed to lean toward the Baronettes side, that they should be declared Bannerettes; but with proviso to give place unto Barons younger sons; and we have delivered in a note to the Lords of the Privileges & Immunities of a Bannarett, but what they will allow I cannot yet hear of: but on Saturday next the final determination is expected, if some troublesome Sprit do not hinder it; which end I wish were well made, & am glad that you are not seen in it at this time.  And no doubt it will be to the Content of you and other understanding gentlemen.  Thus wishing to your worship all health & prosperity, I take my leave.  From my Lodging in the Office of Arms, Thursday the 2d of April Anno Dni. 1612.
    Your Worships bounden to be commanded
        NICH. CHARLES, Lancaster.

The Covenanters to the King. Proposals for Peace. 
unknown
1639.
background: A short passage from Hume shall form the Introduction to this Letter. “The Scottish army was a numerous as that of the King, but inferior in cavalry.  The officers had more reputation and experience; and the soldiers, though undisciplined and ill-armed, were animated as well by the national aversion to England and the dread of becoming a province to their old enemy, as by an unsurmountable fervor of religion.  The Pulpits had extremely assisted the officers in levying recruits, and had thundered out anathemas against all those who went not out to assist the Lord against the mighty.  Yet so prudent were the leaders of the malcontents, that they immediately sent submissive Messages to the King, and craved to be admitted to a Treaty.”  One of these Messages is now before the Reader, with the Answer which was sent in return.
  To the Kings most excellent Majesty the Supplication of his Majesties Subjects of Scotland, humbly showing, 
  That where the former means used by us have not been effectual, for recovering your Majesties favor and the Peace of this your Majesties native kingdom, we fall down yet again at your Majesties feet, most humble supplicating that your Majesty would be graciously pleased to appoint some few of the many worthy Men of your Majesties Kingdom of England who are well affected to the true religion and to our common peace, to hear, by some of us of the same disposition, our humble desires, and to make known to us your Majesties gracious pleasure; that as by the Providence of God we are joined in on land under one King, so by your Majesties great wisdom and tender care all mistakings may be speedily removed, and the Two Kingdoms may be kept in peace and happiness under your Majesties long and prosperous reign; for which we shall never cease to pray, as becomes your Majesties most faithful Subjects.
  [The Answer]
  At His Majesties Camp, the eighth of June 1639.
  His Majesty having understood of the obedience of the Petitioners in reading his Proclamation as was commanded them, is graciously pleased so far to condescend unto their Petition, as to admit some of them to repair to his Majesties Camp upon Monday next, at eight of the Clock in the morning, at the Lord Generals tent; where they shall find Six persons of honor and trust appointed by his Majesty to hear their humble desires.
                  JOHN COKE.

Oliver Cromwell to Col. Hacker.  He that prays and preaches best will fight best.
Dec. 25, 1650.
  Sir,
  I have the best consideration I can for the present in this business, and although I believe Captain Hubbert is a worthy man, and here so much, yet as the case stands, I cannot with satisfaction to my self and some others revoke the Commission I had given to Captain Empson, without offence to them, and reflection upon my own judgment.  I pray let Captain Hubbert know I shall not be unmindful of him, and that no disrespect is intended to him.  But indeed I was not satisfied with your last speech to me about Empson, that he was a better preacher than a fighter or soldier or words to that effect.  Truly I think He that prays and preaches best will fight best.  I know nothing will give like courage and confidence as the knowledge of God in Christ will, and I bless God to see any in this Army able and willing to impart the knowledge they have for the good of others.  And I expect it be encouraged by all Chief Officers in this Army especially: and I hope you will do so.  I pray receive Captain Empson lovingly.  I dare assure you he is a good man and a good officer.  I would we had no worse.  I rest
  Your loving friend,
  O. CROMWELL.
   For Col. Francis Hacket at Pebles or elsewhere.
      Thiese.

Congratulation from “some that feared the Lord” in Herefordshire to Cromwell, upon his dissolution of the Long Parliament.
Herefordshire
May 7th, 1653.
background: Congratulatory Addresses came into fashion in the time of Cromwell.  The Art of framing them, as the present specimen will show, arrived very early at its maturity.
  The humble and thankful Congratulation of some that fear the Lord in the County of Hereford (who are the smallest and unworthiest in the Nation).
  After so many throes and pangs (several contests between the Powers of the World and the Interest of Christ) we conceive the great and long desired Reformation is near the Birth.  We bless the God of Heaven, who has called you forth and led you on, not only in the high places of the field, making you a terror to the Enemy; but also (among those mighty ones whom God had left) to the dissolving of the late Parliament.
  O, my Lord, what are you, that you should be the Instrument to translate the Nation from Oppression to Liberty, from the hands of corrupt Persons to the Saints? and who are we? that we should live to see these days, which our father’s longed to see, and reap the harvest of their hopes?  To be low in our own eyes when God raises us is a true testimony of humility and uprightness.  No action of service or honor ever swelled the heart of Christ; him, we believe, You make your Patterns.
  Let the high praises of God be in our mouths, and the Generations to come tell of his wonders.  Let the improvement of this opportunity be your Care and our Prayer, that you may follow the Lamb where so ever he goes, and we attend you with our persons, petitions, purses, lives, and all that is dear to us, and remain
    Your faithful and humble servants,
      signed by us in the name of many more;
    BEN E. MASON,     WROTH ROGERS,
    JOHN HERRING,     JO. CHOLMELEY,
    RICHARD NICHOLETTS,   MORGAN WATKINS,
    THO. SEABORNE,      RICH. WALSHAM,
    ROBERT WEAVER     JO. WOODDYATT,
    RICH. DELAMAIN,     JOHN GARNONS,
            WALTER MEIRICKE.
  Herefore May 7th, 1653.

From James Smith in Woolwich, to the overseer of Aveley
September 5, 1831
  Sir
  I have taken the Liberty of Writing to you to inform you that my Wife’s Friends have got me a good Situation in Canterbury as horse keeper providing I can get to go I have had only one weeks work since I was in Essex is it here as it is every where they wont employ any one but there one I am very sorry to trouble the Gentlemen but I hope they will take it in to consideration and send me a trifle to help to take my family down as I can’t do here and I can’t go without some assistance for I have been obliged to make away with many of my things to help to keep my children I would not trouble you if it was not force <i>f I can’t get to go I shall be obliged to bring my family home this quarter for I can’t do any longer it is a thing I don’t like to trouble the parish that I am obliged at present I am sure there is not many would gone through as much as I have done to keep from a parish but if the gentlemen will help me down I am in hopes that won’t be any more trouble to them for years if I do go I must be in Canterbury a Saturday the 10 of September for the other man leaves on Friday night and I should like to embrace the opportunity for I may not have another chance again and my friends as taken a deal of trouble in getting the place for me I hoe the Sir you will do what you can for me for it takes a deal to support 5 children I can say for this 16 weeks I have I have no more to say not had 3 weeks work and there is no places here
        direct for Jame Smith
        Mr. Evans Buildings Red
        Lion Street Woolwich
                  Kent
footnotes: ESSEX PAUPER LETTERS 1731-1837

From James Smith in Woolwich to Mr. Sewell in Aveley
Kent
February 8, 1832
  Sir I have rote these few lines to you to inform you of our distress in our family.  My husband has been sick a long while and not able to work for his family and we are very bad off I expect to be confined before long and I am quite unprepared for it for I have not things necessary for my use for I have not been able to get them I have put it very weak thinking that my husband would be able to get work that I might be able to get a few things for my use we have been obliged to make away with every article that would fetch a shilling for to get bread for the children for we have been very bad of this winter I should have come over and stated the case to the gentlemen but I have not got shoes that will bring me so far and my husband is not able to come we have had a deal of sickness this winter we have done as long as we possible can without troubling the Parish we have a large family to keep we have had a deal of sickness lately and I have one that very ill can’t run alone we have 5 children and buried 3 in woolwich without any one’s help we have no one to give us a penny and I hope that the Almighty will soften the gentlemen’s hearts towards us that they will send us a trifle as soon as they can for we are greatly in need of it at present for to get common necessaries for our use that I can’t do without we have children that has not a bit of shoes to their feet at all we would not trouble you if we was not forced to do it I hope the gentlemen will send us a trifle as it is not often that we do trouble them I would not know only for the situation that I am in and not things for my use but if the gentlemen will not send us any thing I must come home and remain there until I am confined my husband would have come with his family before but we are so much in dept that we can’t get away from this I hope gentlemen that you will send us a little to help us through our trouble and to get us a few things that can’t be without and I hope you will send as soon as possible please God we will not trouble again for one while for the summer is coming and I shall be able to work often that get over my trouble I am not afraid of work to help keep my family
  Your Humble Servant
  James Smith 
  direct for James Smith
  Mr. Evans Buildings Red
  Lion Street Woolwich

From James Smith in Woolwich, to the overseers of Aveley
Kent
September 6, 1832
Gentlemen
  I must be so troublesome to the Parish for a little assistance for I have been laid up this 5 weeks very bad and I have one boy that is very ill at present and my wife is in a poor state of health and has been since she was confined I have 6 children and not one of them able to earn a penny and that makes it very hard for us My wife earns a little at her needle when she is able it is very little that I can earn for I am not fit for hard work now I have had so much sickness and if I trouble this Parish they will send my family home because there is so much sickness in Woolwich now I am very bad of for I have been obliged to make away with all I have to support my family I will take it as a great favor if the gentlemen will assist me a little for I can’t do any longer without some little to help me and if the gentlemen will not do any thing for me I must trouble this Parish and come home I don’t want to be so troublesome but I have done as long as I can do if I come home I can’t do field work and there is nothing else to do and here I am so much known that I can sometimes get a job in the stables when I am able to do it I can’t well leave woolwich for I am so much in debt I hope the gentlemen will do a little for me as soon as they can for I am in great distress the children are very bad off for clothing and shoes and that is very bad to go without shoes I hope you will write by return post
    so no more Your Humble
    Servant James Smith
    direct for James Smith
    Mr. Evans Buildings
    Red Lion Street
    Woolwich Kent

From James Smith in Woolwich to the overseers of Aveley
Kent
25 September 1832
  Sir I am very sorry that the gentlemen would not send me a trifle to assist me and my family as I am in great need of it for I have 6 months rent to make up by the 29 ofand thats is on Saturday next at 2 shillings per week and if I can’t pay it I shall lose what few things I have and what little I have got and then I am sure I can’t get any more I am sorry to trouble you but I can’t do without I do make all the shift I can before I do trouble you I wish I could do without it I should be very glad but my family is so large and so much sickness that I can’t avoid it but I hope that the gentlemen will do a little for me and I won’t trouble them all the winter no more
                so no more
                Your humble servant
                James Smith

From James Smith in Woolwich [Kent] to Mr. Sewell in Aveley, 21 March 1833
unknown
March 21 1833
  Gentlemen
  I am sorry to be so troublesome but I cannot avoid it for I have been laid up with the rhumatic gout and not been able to do anything for this 3 months  My pension is not much to keep 6 children and our two selves I have been obliged to draw my money weekly to keep us and that is very little I am not able to work in the winter but in the summer I can do without troubling the Parish I do as long as I can before I do I pay 2 shillings per week for one room and that I have to pay a quarters rent on the 29 of this month and I have not got it to pay if the gentlemen will be so kind as to send me a trifle to help me to pay it or else I shall have what few things taken away from us and then I am sure I can never get any more and then I must come home but don’t want to come for I know the workhouse will be my portion for I am not able to work in the fields and in the summer I got about for one and the others as I am so much known I hope Sir you will assist me this time as I will give you my word that I won’t trouble you any more until next Christmas as the Summer is coming I can do but in the winter I cannot with my family for I leave not one to bring in any thing My wife is laid up with bad eyes and often is and can get no care for them I should not trouble if I could do with I have been obliged to make away with last thing that will fetch a shilling for bread for the children if the gentlemen will not be leave me I can show the doublicates my wife would come and state the case to you but her eyes is bad and we have not got the money to come with I hope you will do what you can for me and if the gentlemen will not assist me in paying of my rent I hope you will let me know and I must sell what few things I have to pay the rent and come home at you must consider that my pension is not much to keep 3 of us and when I am laid up I want nourishment but I can’t have it I hope you will let me know as soon as you can for the time is short James Smith
  Mr. Evans Building
  Red Lion Street
  Woolwich
  I received the last and much obliged to you for your kindness

AN IRISH CORPUS ASTRONOMIAE
unknown
unknown
INTRODUCTION
  It would, perhaps, be unjust to class the Corpus Astronomiae among the livres populaires of which M. Nisard has made so laborious a study.  It is true that it bears much resemblance in detail to publications like the Almanach liégeois and the Calendrier et Connpost des Bergers, which made it their business to supply to half-educated or rural audiences an abstract of what passed for useful and reliable information upon subjects connected with the calendar, agriculture or medicine.  But the aim of the compiler of the Corpus was higher and his execution less superficial.  He seems to have made a serious attempt to compose a manual which might serve to provide readers unable or unwilling to master larger treatises with an abridgment of the main facts or theories recognized as of traditional importance in physical, astronomical and agricultural science.  The work, slight as it is, serves at any rate to emphasize the lasting vitality of much of the learning of the ancient world, which, transmitted to the Middle Ages in the works of teachers and compilers, was renewed by contact with Arabian science, and formed the basis of general knowledge for succeeding generations.  The author reproduces with but slight variation the definitions which, given in the scientific schools of Athens and Alexandria, were popularized by the Stoics, reproduced from Isidore to Bede and from Bede to Rabanus Maurus, till they passed into the common stock of European knowledge; his system of chronology is the chronology of Eusebius, who built upon the foundations of Greek science; his astronomy, more than a century after the death of Copernicus, is the Ptolemaic system, itself a reaction against the more enlightened views of advanced astronomers, such as Aristarchus of Samos; for his agriculture he relies not upon contemporaries but upon Pliny and Palladius and “Abencenif”; and medicine is complicated still by the considerations which weighed with the practitioners of the Roman Empire.
  Our author begins with chronology, passes on to physics and agriculture, devotes the bulk of his book to astrology and ends with a perfunctory treatment of the application of astrology to medical theory and practice:  it will be most convenient to follow this order in giving a short sketch of the progress of those branches of science before his time, and the conditions under which the work was written and translated.
  The daily life of the farmer and the sailor had from the earliest times necessitated some elementary knowledge of astronomy so far as concerned the points of the compass, the revolution of the seasons and the phases of the moon:  the necessities of civil government and historical records of even a meagre kind demanded greater precision in chronological calculations, which the rise of scientific curiosity with regard to the movements of the sun, moon and planets, and the revolution of the stars, afforded the means of fixing.  The labors of astronomers and mathematicians in Babylon, Egypt and Greece had brought these calculations to a reasonable degree of precision by the first century B.C.:  the length of the solar year had been approximately determined; the division of time into months according to the phases of the moon had been accommodated to the more accurate division based upon the path of the sun among the signs of the zodiac; and some attempt had been made to harmonize the various methods of reckoning time which were in vogue in different countries and apply the results of these researches to the formation of canons of historical chronology.  These studies were pursued by the mathematicians and astronomers of Alexandria with marked success under the enlightened patronage of the Ptolemies:  Julius Caesar made use of their labors in the reformation of the Roman Calendar which, under the combined influences of ignorance and sacerdotal fraud, had fallen into a state of portentous confusion.  When he employed the Alexandrian astronomer Sosigenes upon the task it was found impossible to bring the civil into conformity with the astronomical reckoning by any means less drastic than the addition of 67 days to the current year.  The reforms of Sosigenes adopted on the 1st of January 45 B.C. remained in use until Pope Gregory XIII., employing the more accurate calculations then possible, introduced in 1582 the calendar still in use.
  The application of more accurate chronological researches to the science of history was introduced to the Roman world by a contemporary of Caesar, M. Terentius Varro, who did little more than adopt the fruit of the labors of Alexandrian scholars.  His accurate and laborious application of scientific methods of research to the history of Rome and of Latin Literature marks an epoch in chronological studies; his results (though his historical and chronological treatises exist only in fragments) were adopted by succeeding writers who did not always acknowledge the debt with the frankness with which S. Augustine confesses to a similar obligation in the sphere of Roman religion.  His works form a principal source in such matters for writers like the Elder Pliny and Isidore of Seville who thus transferred to mediaeval Europe some fragments of ancient erudition.
  But the interest taken in chronological study in Christian circles from the second century onwards was not the disinterested scientific interest of an Eratosthenes or a Varro.  The pursuit of knowledge for its own sake, still more the desire to enlarge its boundaries, became more and more rare.  But a knowledge of chronology was urgently demanded for the purposes of ecclesiastical discipline and of controversial defense.
  The calculation of the date of Easter required at least some acquaintance with astronomical theory.  The controversy which grew up around this question led to many systems of calculation more or less adapted to preserve the apostolic tradition.  The Greek and Roman Churches found themselves unable to agree:  within the Roman Church itself various systems were successively in vogue; and one great point of controversy between the Church on the Continent of Europe and the Churches of Britain and Ireland turned upon the obstinate maintenance by the Celtic Christians of a method of calculating the date of the festival long abandoned as unsatisfactory by the official voice of the Roman Church.
  This isolated point of chronological study was, however, a mere matter of accurate calculation and was settled by the end of the seventh century throughout the West.  But the purposes of controversy gave rise to a system of historical chronology which imposed itself upon the intellect of Europe almost till our own day.  The Church found itself confronted by a civilization resting upon an historical tradition impossible to reconcile with the data of its own documents.  The Egyptians and Chaldaeans claimed an antiquity which made the Garden of Eden seem a comparatively modern enclosure.  Controversialists, like Porphyry, attacked the historical credibility of the Jewish records; and the moral and religious truths which even rival controversialists had to admit in the documents appealed to by their opponents were freely asserted by both sides to have been shamelessly borrowed by the opposite side from teachings of superior antiquity.  It became necessary, therefore, for Christian controversialists to fix some system of chronology by which the sceptical assertions of their opponents might be confuted.  The work was undertaken first by Julius Africanus, whose system is only the first of a long series of which that of Eusebius, adopted by Jerome, is the chief.  He drew out the chronology of the globe from the day of the creation until his own time:  upon the basis of the Old Testament he fixed the duration and the chronological details of the successive epochs from the appearance of Adam till the birth of Christ; he synchronized with this the history of the nations of antiquity, dealing firmly with traditions which demanded larger space than could be granted by his framework.  Chronologers like Varro and his Roman followers were caught in their own trap.  With a scientific candor which proved a fatal defeat to the controversial use of his results, Varro had admitted a mythical period about which nothing whatever was known, extending from the creation to the flood of Deucalion and a second period, largely filled with the fond inventions of poets and mythographers, which extended from the flood to the first Olympiad.  But in the Chronicle of Eusebius the period before the flood presented a foothold for the chronologer as firm as any period of a later date, while the somewhat dubious sanctity attaching to the date of the first Olympiad was as nothing to the certainty with which every date in Jewish history might be determined.
  With some variations in detail, but with no uncertainty as to the method to be pursued in determining the facts, the system of Eusebius and Jerome was accepted as the orthodox view.  It passed into the encyclopedias of learning and into the minor manuals of the Middle Ages.  It survived the Renaissance.  Scholars like Scaliger or Petavius or Spanheim or Ussher might enlarge the learned apparatus by which the results were confirmed or rectified.  Controversy might rage about points of detail and the period before the birth of Christ might be enlarged or diminished, as the result of some epoch making researches, by periods of a few hundred years.  But the methods of enquiry, and the data appealed to, remained unaltered, and successive writers merely reproduced an accepted doctrine which it would be heresy to endeavor to confute.  Once at least the broad and confident stream of these speculations was ruffled by the bold plunge of a recklass investigator.  Isaac de la Peyrere, engaged in an assault upon the fortress of the doctrine of Original Sin, invented in a commentary upon some verses of S. Paul’s Epistle to the Romans the theory of a race of men anterior to Adam.  So startling an hypothesis required support of no usual kind, and its author appealed with an almost pathetic confidence to the historical records of Egypt and Chaldea and the vast length of time required for the slow advance of the sciences of astronomy and astrology.  He labored in a learned treatise to gain for his arguments at least an unbiased hearing.  His book was burnt, and the author made his peace with orthodoxy by bidding a long farewell to chronology.
  If the chronology is traditional, so is the physical science and the astronomy of our treatise.  The doctrine of the four elements has had a long history.  Invented by Empedocles of Agrigentum, it found favor with Aristotle, and was incorporated into his system of physics, certain concessions and adaptations being made to disarm criticism; thus Aristotle added the theory of the quinta essentia of which the heavens were composed and admitted that the elements might be interchangeable.  The rival system was that of Leucippus and Democritus who invented the atomic theory, seized upon by Epicurus and his school as forming a sufficiently strong scientific basis (if not too rigidly handled) for their practical atheism and their hedonistic ethics.  The Stoics had adopted as the basis of their physics the theory of Empedocles and Aristotle, though upon the addition of the quinta essentia they seem to have preferred to suspend judgment; upon their physical theories the Stoics founded their theology, which they regarded as a branch of the wider subject of physics; and their ethics were in intimate dependence upon both.  Their great teacher Poseidonios, a man of wide interests and encyclopedic learning, gave to Stoicism during the first century B.C. the form in which in appealed with such striking success to the Graeco-Roman world.  Fusing with the Stoic theology enough of the mysticism of the East to appeal to religious feelings hardly to be satisfied by the emotional applications of physics, enough of the mysticism of the East to appeal to religious feelings hardly to be satisfied by the emotional applications of physics, enough of common sense and knowledge of the world to make the Stoic ethics palatable to ordinary men and women, he gave to Stoicism an influence and an impetus which carried it through many generations as a practical guide for life.  Its ethics took an extraordinary hold of the serious classes in the Roman Empire; and the undoubted superiority of its moral creed lent a fictitious importance to the system of physics with which it was associated.  The atomic theory of the Epicureans passed into disrepute not because its upholders were bereft of arguments but because they were believed to be bereft of morals.  The views of Seneca upon ethics were the best guarantee of the soundness of his views upon physics.  The doctrine of the four elements not merely carried the day but by forming an integral part of a philosophy which seemed to have more affinity with Christianity upon the moral side than any other crushed out rival theories by engaging the support of theology.
  The influence of the physics of the Stoic school in Christian circles is perhaps nowhere shown in a more-striking light than in S. Basil’s Hexaemeron, a homiletic commentary upon the Mosiac record of the six days of Creation.  Where questions of physics are concerned S. Basil accepts without hesitation the views of his Stoic teachers:  he blends the views of Poseidonios with the testimony of Moses, and many of the homilies of which the treatise is composed read as if they had been written by Seneca and translated into Greek with the necessary additions and alterations by some Christian controversialist.  His work was introduced to the West by S. Ambrose whose Hexaemeron is virtually a translation of the work of S. Basil; and, as purely scientific interests and studies declined, succeeding writers were content to take over the speculations or the assertions of predecessors of approved orthodoxy and pass them on in manuals or encyclopedias to mediaeval Europe.
  As with physics, so with astronomy.  The extent of the progress made by scientific astronomers in the Greek world is often very imperfectly understood:  Anaxagoras and the Pythagoreans had discovered the true explanation of solar and lunar eclipses; Hipparchus discovered the precession of the equinoxes; to Heracleides of Pontos is ascribed with great probability the discovery that the planets Venus and Mercury circle round the sun; Aristarchus of Samos held not merely that the earth turns upon its axis but has a yearly revolution round the sun.  The fact that none of these discoveries was fully followed out and some of them forgotten is due no doubt to various causes, but chiefly to the gradual triumph of a point of view from which scientific truth seemed unimportant and the interests of edification and system all in all.  The importance of the geocentric hypothesis lay in its ethical and spiritual implications.  To the philosopher and the theologian alike the importance of ethical and spiritual considerations was a weighty count against any system of physics or astronomy with which these interests seemed to require any special or delicate adjustment.  Much of this bias was unconscious; the “undesigned coincidences” between a system of nature in which earth formed the centre, round which the circle of the heavens revolved, charming man’s eye by its beauty and leading his thoughts by its unerring and perpetual procession to search for the Great Cause which first conceived and unfolded so awful and magnificent a spectacle, and a system of philosophy or theology in which the soul of man was the prime interest and care of the Divine Being were too striking to be lost sight of and too specious and full of edification to be left neglected.  Here again the impetus to facile systematization seems to have come from Stoicism, and in the first place from the encyclopedic intellect of Poseidonios, eager to enrich Stocicism and fit it to conquer the world by rounding off all knowledge into a receptacle for its creed.  The gradual fusing of all science into a consistent system, far from possible after the lapse of so many more centuries, was undertaken light-heartedly.  Enquiry seemed to pause and retire, losing sight of its task in the seductions of arranging an exhibition of its past theories and achievements.
  Thus a theory of the world was built up from traditional hypotheses and solidified into an accredited system.  The earth occupied the centre of the universe; composed of the four elements earth, water, air and fire, vehicle of the four qualities, the dry, the moist, the cold and the hot, lying between the four points of the compass, refreshed by the four winds of heaven, enjoying the alternations of the four seasons, inhabited by a race of beings whose physical health depended upon the due admixture of the four humors, and whose moral health demanded the practice of the four cardinal virtues—what could be more symmetrical, more satisfactory or more convincingly expounded?  This earth was surrounded by a series of eight concentric spheres carrying the seven planets (the Moon, Venus, Mercury, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn), and the fixed stars; beyond was the crystalline sphere whose majestic motion, carried downwards, set all the other spheres in motion at their respective velocities.  Above and beyond this outer sphere there came in time to be placed the empyrean or the “third heaven” the abode of God Himself.
  Accepted because it was authoritative, because it was plausible and because it was convenient, this theory of the physical universe incorporated and became incorporated with the most diverse philosophical and religious systems.  Pagans like Macrobius could expound it with religious fervor, and find in the music of the spheres the physical counterpart of its intellectual harmony; Pythagorean and oriental mystics almost seemed to need no other proof of its adequacy than the satisfactory position which was assigned to the numbers four and seven in the scheme; the astronomer found in it at once a tenable explanation of the phenomena which it was his business to expound and a sufficient field for the exercise of his unprogressive ingenuity; the theologian, who was not concerned with physical science as such, found it answer sufficiently to his purpose and long familiarity with its tenets and their homiletic convenience led him to view with suspicion and aversion any attempt to improve upon its teachings.  It found its way into the accepted encyclopedias in which the outlines of all knowledge were contained in a form suited for an ever declining taste and capacity for physical speculation.  Its imposing fabric supported upon all hands and serving all interests impartially received fresh confirmation by the renewed acquaintance with Aristotle through Arabian and Jewish sources which marked the rise of Mediaeval Scholasticism and it was only broken up as one of the last intellectual results of the Renaissance.
  But within its authoritative framework alterations and adaptations might be made.  In astronomy more and more accurate calculations were due to the labors of Arabian astronomers and their European followers.  The compilation of the Alphonsine Tables which served as an authoritative text book of astronomy for many generations marks a distinct advance in many respects upon previous manuals.  An additional sphere might be timidly added and almost silently withdrawn from the celestial harmony by an intrepid speculator; but such minor alterations left the main structure undisturbed.  It was in the gradual and irresistible growth of astrological speculation that the most striking alteration was made.  The belief in the power of celestial influences upon sublunar affairs was ingrained in most of the religions of the ancient world.  The Greeks adopted it from oriental sources and applied to its exposition the resources of their ingenious intellect.  The belief in the powers of the moon and planets over human life and destiny formed a bond of union between all the later forms of heathen philosophy and religion and hung like a dark cloud over the life and thought of the later Roman Empire.  The authoritative text book was the Tetrabiblos ascribed to the astronomer Ptolemy: the science was made the subject of a tedious and obscure poem by Manilius early in the first century; and in the fifth the laborious compilation of Firmicus Maternus supplied the Roman world with an authoritative text book of astrology in all its ramifications.  The Egyptian tradition was popularized, if not understood, in the work attributed to Nechepso and Petosiris and in the farrago of Vettius Valens.  The extent to which it spread its unwholesome influence is shown by the number of astrological manuscripts still extant, though still unpublished, in the greater libraries of Europe.
  Frowned upon alike by the civil and ecclesiastical authorities as a fit nursery for the production of unauthorized influence in the present and illicit speculation about the future it continued to flourish in obscurity or push itself into a partially tolerated prominence.  The truth is that it was too much akin to the authoritative physical science and astronomy to be wholly banished.  To cast the horoscope of the Emperor was a capital offence, but private horoscopes were less criminal and it seemed an innocent employment of astronomical science to trace the moderating influence of the planets or signs upon the physical formation or mental and moral characteristics of individuals, or their share in producing a fruitful or a barren season.  The science sometimes proved a useful ally to the civil power.  In the seventh century Stephen of Alexandria cast under Imperial sanction the horoscope of Mohammedanism and predicted its approaching downfall before the arms of the Eastern Empire.  The growing influence of Arabian speculation in Europe lent a powerful support to a system of speculation already too firmly rooted to be capable of expulsion.  theologians made terms with it and admitted in guarded but explicit language the possibility of astral influences upon character, subject to the supreme influences of grace and free will.  An eclipse or a comet which astrologers declared to portend an outburst of the malign activities of Mars or Saturn was admitted by the divines to be a warning, not a cause, of impending disaster, capable of being averted by repentance and reformation.
  In the sphere of medical theory and practice its influence grew to stupendous proportions.  The Greek physicians of the scientific school of Hippocrates and Galen had left a loophole for its admission here and there.  The science which claimed to predict the duration of a life and the means by which it would terminate, or to fix the duration and issue of a sickness, could not remain for ever unworthy of the attention of the physician.  The Arabian medical writers laid a real stress upon the influences of the planets in forming a diagnosis and in determining the means and the time of treatment.  The harmony of the universe, the subtle links which bound together all its parts, the connection of the elements with the planets and signs on the one hand and the humors on the other, forced a study of the planetary influences upon the attention of the practitioner who desired success and reputation.  An epidemic which was attributed to the influence of Saturn could not be expected to yield to a treatment which left its origin altogether out of account.  The Crusades which planted Europe with strange and loathsome diseases brought also an increased knowledge of the mysterious science by which they might be alleviated or controlled.
  But it was the period of the Renaissance with its uncontrolled outburst of universal speculation and curiosity which saw the real triumph of astrology.  Humanists and men of letters like Marsilio Feino plunged into the astral mysteries with enthusiasm and hope.  The ridicule of more sober minds, like that of Pico della Mirandola, produced little effect.  The new key seemed like to unlock all mysteries.  Succeeding applications of the celestial science only confirmed the world in its belief in its almost universal efficacy and utility.  The Greek and Latin astrologers were studied and applied.  Melanchthon could reconcile it with his reformed religion to translate Ptolemy’s Tetrabiblos into Latin as Cardan found it not incompatible with his to cast the horoscope of the Redeemer.  The most intimate relations of domestic life were regulated by considerations of planetary conjunctions, and the world ate and drank and dressed and went on journeys with one eye fixed upon the earth and the other upon the sky.
  Medical practice, until the Hippocratic revival of the fourteenth century, was becoming more and more a matter of blind adherence to traditions imperfectly understood.  The treatment of disease had ceased to be a matter to be regulated by observation and experiment; it consisted in the interpretation and application of the standard texts, the translations of Rhazes and Avicenna and their European followers.  Anatomy was almost as little practised in the Schools of Europe as in the Schools of Arabia where even to ask whether dissection were permissible or no constituted in itself an offense against the law.  The coction and elimination and putrefaction of the humors, the ‘derivation’ and ‘revulsion’ by blood-letting, the mysteries of the opening of the veins by latitudinal or longitudinal section, and the side on which the vein was to be opened, were discussed and settled in complete indifference to any but literary and philosophical considerations.  Different methods of purging, cauterizing and bleeding, the administration of simples the identity of which was doubtful and which could hardly be procured, specifies such as “oil of scorpions” and the like, formed the stock in trade of the mediaeval physician who was not content to rely upon diet and regimen.  Prognostication by uroscopy was universally resorted to in almost every  kind of malady, and with some physicians was practically the only kind of prognostication that they knew.
  The revival of medical knowledge was scarcely begun when the renewed influence of astrology made itself felt.  Warnings against even slight surgical operations upon certain unfavorable days were known and acted upon from early times; but there is a wide interval between the precepts of Hippocrates and those of Ptolemy on this matter, and superstition grew fast.  Among the mass of rubbish which has been foisted into the works of the Venerable Bede there is a tract De minutione sanguinis siue de phlebotomia in which the days of every month in the year and every day of the moon are tabulated according to their suitability for bleeding.  But a more extended acquaintance with the genuine literature of ancient astrology increased the opportunities for its use in medicine.  The organs and parts of the body were divided among the planets and the signs of the zodiac; every hour of the day had a planetary and, consequently, medical significance; the horoscope of the day on which the patient went to bed offered several infallible means of predicting the issue of his illness, entirely independent of its nature and of the treatment to be employed:  a more profound study of nature revealed the planetary and astral affinities of every herb of the field and every drug in the pharmacopeia and brought within the purview of astrology the very metal of which a scalpel should be made.
  Such, in brief outline, were the traditions under whose influence the Corpus Astronomiae was composed.  Even a partial critic could not pretend that its author was abreast of the learning or culture of his time.  He knows nothing of the newer astronomy which was to revolutionize the whole theory of the universe, though in this respect he was no worse than many of his contemporaries.  It is curious, however, that in enumerating the spheres he reckons the extra sphere introduced by Albategni, in opposition to the majority of his contemporaries who decline to acknowledge more than ten; this may be due to the astronomical traditions of Arabian science, which still lingered in Spain and was, perhaps, to be expected from a countryman of Alfonso the Tenth.  His agricultural knowledge is derived mainly from Palladius, whose work was so popular in the Middle Ages, while his knowledge of Pliny is, no doubt, due to the increased attention paid to the Natural History since the revival of learning.  In his devotion to astrology, to which he gives his main attention, he is a true child of his age, and in his puerile remarks upon medicine he falls far below the standard of the medical knowledge available at that time to Europe.  This again may be due to his Spanish training; for while the revival of medical knowledge was a product of the intellect of Southern Europe, the Spanish physicians lingered behind and adhered in general to the precepts and practice of a less enlightened age.
  The translation of the work into Irish is a fresh example of the pathetic devotion to learning which, amid obstacles that might almost have seemed insurmountable, marked the Irish nation.  The subjects of the work appealed to an Irish priest through the force of a long tradition.   Among the earliest monuments of Irish learning is Cummian’s celebrated contribution to the literature of the paschal controversy, and at a later period Dungal the Recluse won a European reputation as an astronomer at the court of Charles the Great.  During the thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth centuries many translations into Irish (still extant though still unpublished) were made of treatises upon mathematics, astronomy, astrology and medicine; the use of the Arabic numerals seems to have been known in Ireland early in the fourteenth century.  The pseudo Aristotelian treatise Secreta Secretorum with its medical lore of the Salernitan type was translated early in the fifteenth century.  Miss Power has lately edited for the Irish Texts Society An Irish Astronomical Tract translated from a Latin version of the astronomy of Messahalah perhaps as early as the fourteenth century.
  The translation of the Corpus Astronomiae was probably  made for educational purposes, as were many of the translations referred to above.  Denied the advantage of opportunities for the higher learning at home, Irish scholars and ecclesiastics were forced to seek such opportunities upon the Continent and characteristically tried to make available for their less fortunate countrymen who remained in Ireland the savor of those fruits which they themselves had first tasted in exile.
      E.M.H.
  4. INFORMATION OF THE HUSBANDRY OF THE YEAR ACCORDING TO PLINY.
  January.
    With the crescent moon of this month husbandmen should prune early-flowering trees such as almond-trees, plum-trees and the like.  The bitter pips of oranges and lemons, and (the kernels) of bullaces and walnuts should be sown at this time in warm ground.  From full moon till new again is the best time for cutting every kind of timber so that it may be more durable; but the best trees for that purpose are the trees that have lost their foliage.  It is well here to put manure on the land and to dress it with it, and to sow garlic and onions.  Pliny says, Lib. 18, that the time to cut anything so that it may keep a long time, and also for castrating and grubbing, is after the full of each moon.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, fruits will be plentiful, woods will yield a bad return, there will be abundance of water, unwholesome winds, disturbances among peoples, and deaths of men and cattle in the land in which it is heard, according to the statements of the learned author and distinguished astronomer Leopold of Austria.  And the first thunder is the first thunder that occurs after New Year’s Day or on that very day itself.
  5. HUSBANDRY AND PROGNOSTICATION FOR THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY, ACCORDING TO PALLADIUS.
    From the new moon of this month until it is full, it is well to sow hemp and flax, mustard and melons, that they may be early.  From the full of this moon until the new moon, it is well to cut the rods for baskets and such like (but Palladius says that it is better to cut them about this time of the moon in the month of January).  The vines may be pruned.  Disease of the feet is dangerous at this time.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, it signifies the death of powerful people, diseases of the head, pain in the ears, great frost and little fruit, according to Leopold.
  6. MARCH ACCORDI NG TO PALLADIUS.
    With the crescent moon of this month melons, cucumbers, and pumpkins should be sown, and hemp and flax in warm ground:  and it is better to sow them now than in the month of February; and likewise the chick-peas and all bitter pips, and the young fig-trees in a moderately warm ground.  With the full of this moon it is well to weed the gardens and the wheat, and to plough the fields so that the weeds may not grow, and to clean beneath the trees which bud late, viz., the mulberry-tree and the pomegranate, &c.  The pruning of the vines should not be put off from this time, because just now they are beginning to bud.  Evil humors are engendered in this month, and diseases of the head are dangerous.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, it denotes great winds, plenty of grain and grass, dissensions, terrors and death in the land in which it is heard, according to Leopold.
  7. THE WORKS OF APRIL ACCORDING TO ABENCENIF.
    From the crescent moon of this month until full moon it is well to plant all kitchen-gardens, though it is a good plan likewise to do so in any month from January to August.  From the full of this moon until new moon again, it is well to irrigate the tilled fields which are dry and hot.  This is a good month for ridding the bee-hives of spiders and grubs which are produced in them.  This time is very wholesome for taking a purge, and diseases in the neck and throat are dangerous.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, it denotes that the year will be very fruitful; plenty of wine and wheat and cattle, especially of wheat in dry stony grounds; but it likewise denotes perils on the sea in the kingdoms in which it is heard, according to Leopold.
  8. THE HUSBANDRY OF MAY ACCORDING TO PALLADIUS.
    From new moon until full moon, it is well to clip the saffron (-beds), and to admit the he-goats to the goats.  About this time all sorts of pot-herbs may be planted.  From full moon until new moon is better than any other time for burning and baking bricks, and for all kinds of earthenware work, for this is the best time in the year for that purpose.  At this time it is well to plough the fields which are sown in Autumn, and in cold ground.  Calves, boars and male lambs may be castrated.  Any disease in the shoulders and in the hands is more dangerous than at any other time, and especially a wound from iron.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, i.e., from the beginning of the year, it denotes abundance of water, injury to the birds, plenty of bread and all sorts of legumes in the kingdoms in which it is heard, according to Leopold.
  9. THE WORKS OF THE MONTH OF JUNE ACCORDING TO PALLADIUS.
    From new moon until full moon it is well to prune the trees which have a sappy bark—viz., orange trees, fig-trees, and olive-trees, and other such trees; also to plant cabbage and all other pot-herbs so that they may be early.  From full moon until new moon it is well to cut and thresh beans and every other sort of legume if they are dry.  Palladius says that if the fig-trees are irrigated at this time they will ripen the earlier, and as a result they will be better and more tasty.  The wool which is shorn from the sheep at this time is better than at any other time, because it is more sudoriferous.  In this month diseases of the chest and stomach and lungs are dangerous.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, it denotes plenty of bread and fish, loss of fruits, unrest among the peoples, and inundations of rivers in the land in which it is heard, according to Leopold.
  10. THE WORKS OF JULY ACCORDING TO PALLADIUS.
    From the new of this moon until it is full, it is usual to plant curly cabbage, turnips, onions, carrots and mustard; and to cut the brambles from the ground so that they may not grow.  From the full of this moon until new moon, it is profitable to reap the wheat, so that it may be good and last loner.  Disease of the heart is injurious in this month.  Further, purgings, blood-letting, swimming, bathing and mid-day sleep are injurious in this month.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, it denotes great trouble in the kingdoms, troublous commotion in the towns, scarcity of bread, but plentiful fruit, in the land in which it is heard, as Leopold says.
  11. THE WORKD OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST ACCORDING TO PALLADIUS.
    From the new of this moon until full moon, it is well to put the manure on the fields for the wheat, to dig the onions for storing; and, after rain, to sow the radishes, the turnips and the late cabbage.  From the full of this moon until new moon, it is usual to dry grapes, prunes and figs, so that use may be made of them at some other time; and to sow the seed of cabbages and beans.  In this month the company of women, midday sleep and the bath are very dangerous; and purging is not good, nor blood-letting, except in a case of urgent necessity.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, it denotes death to the fishes of the sea and to four-footed animals, quietude for the peoples, and many diseases in the kingdoms in which it is heard, according to Leopold of Austria.
  12. THE WORKS OF SEPTEMBER ACCORDING TO PALLADIUS.
    From the new of this moon until full moon, it is well to sow the rye, the barley and the beans in a warm ground; for it is in cold ground that it is best to sow them before this.  This is a very good time for sowing flax.  From the full of this moon until new moon is the natural time for gathering the grapes and making wine.  It is well to plough and dig the ground now, and to dress it with manure, in order to sow all kinds of garden herbs in it.  throughout this month the blood is in good condition for letting, and every disease in the kidneys and the hips is very dangerous.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, it denotes drought at the beginning of the year, and moisture at its end; abundance of bread, but dear; and much menace of death to the populace in the land in which it is heard, according to Leopold.
  13. THE WORKS OF OCTOBER ACCORDING TO ABENCENIF.
    From the beginning of this month until the end, in a late soil, it is proper to make oil and wine, and it is well to sow now all kinds of grain, such as wheat, rye, barley, and such like.  Filberts, chestnuts, pomegranates and walnuts should be gathered, and the late fruit likewise:  and cherry, pear and apple trees should be planted.  All wounds are difficult to heal in this month, and disease of the private parts is dangerous.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, it denotes storms of wind and commotion of the airs, scarcity of bread and fruit and wine, death of cattle and fish in the land in which it is heard, according to Leopold.
  14. THE WORKS OF NOVEMBER ACCORDING TO ABENCENIF.
    From the beginning of this month it is well to plough the fields, and the ground in which weeds are, so that they may not grow; and to cut the decayed wood from the trees, and dress them with manure.  At the full of this moon, and at the full of the moon after it, it is well to salt meat, and to cut timber for work.  This is a good month for blood letting, and for bathing, and for healing every kind of disease.  And diseases in the legs are dangerous.  If it is in this month that the first thunder is heard, it denotes damage to the sheep, abundance of wheat, joyousness in the people.  The weather will come in well.  It will not rain except a very profitable amount; nevertheless, the fruit will fall from the trees sooner than is right in the land in which it is heard, according to Leopold.
  15. THE WORKS OF DECEMBER ACCORDING TO PALLADIUS.
    Although there is little field work in this month, still it is possible to sow garden herbs for the spring, and the timber which is cut at this time is very durable, and the zealous and careful husbandman will not lack something to do, even at this time (as Palladius says), namely, to collect the manure in heaps, to make ropes and cords for the time to come, to clean the cellars, and to do every other work which belongs to the character of the season.  There are many other things which might be said about each month which we have not said because we do not wish to be prolix.  It is now that disease of the knees is dangerous.  If it is now that the first thunder is heard, it denotes a good year, wholesomeness, and peace among the tribes in the land in which it is heard, according to Leopold of Austria.
  THE FOURTH CHAPTER
  1. CONCERNING THE PROGNOSTICATION OF THE SEASON.  CONCERNING THE PLANETS AND THEIR PROPERTIES ACCORDING TO LEOPOLD.
    Before we commence with the prognostication of the year, it is not amiss to explain to proverb which is frequently quoted by the learned, and even by Christian astrologers, because it bears upon this work:  viz., Astra movent homines, sed Deus astra movet, that is, that the stars move and incline people to a change of nature, and that they do the same with all the created things of the world, living, sensible and insensible, shedding into them their proper qualities, good or bad.  But further, the same proverb says that God moves the stars themselves, giving them by his great powers the natural virtue to influence men and every other thing according to its own proper nature; so that it is from them that the natural inclination of everything is; whence comes the old saying of Aristotle, which runs:  Quod a natura inest, semper inest; that is, what is in a man naturally is separated from him with difficulty; and not only so, but it stays with him perpetually; for we prove that constantly in our own case and in the case of all others; but further it is certain that it is possible for the wise and discreet man to gain the victory over every inclination which comes naturally.  Accordingly it has been wisely said:  Sapiens dominabitur astris, that is, that the wise man is master of the stars, for he makes his proud nature mild and gentle, and he avoids the evil to which he is prone.  Further, great almighty God, to whom we render all praise, has given to the individual the power of his free will, in such a way that not only the stars but also the demons, hell, and every other thing are not able to influence a man unless he be guilty himself in that regard, much less when he has the assistance of God’s grace.  Accordingly I say that the stars can influence man naturally, but that they cannot force him.  Of this natural inclination I wish to treat in the natural prognostication of the planets, while submitting myself and lying wholly and completely beneath the correction and the guidance of our holy mother, the Roman Catholic Church.
  2. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES OF THE PLANET WHICH IS CALLED SATURNUS.
    The place of this planet is the seventh sphere, which is called the seventh heaven, and according to natural order it is called the first planet.  Its property is to be cold and dry, melancholic, earthy, masculine and diurnal.  It is naturally an enemy to human nature.  It is the cause of much labor, famine, hardship, scarcity of the year’s fruit, and detriment to food-stuffs:  it causes likewise sorrow, sightings, destruction, poverty and death; trouble, unrest, weariness and despair.  This planet usually inclines those over whom it rules to hatred, sadness, melancholy, torment, horror, loneliness and disinclination for company.  This planet rules over the aged, the lonely, the miserly, the sad, the melancholic, the usurious, the penurious, the servile, the despondent, the incredulous, the inordinate, the gluttonous, the superstitious, and further over those who are prone to the black art, and who walk amongst the dead corpses making witchcraft and deviltry.
  3. CONCERNING THE PROGNOSTICATION OF THIS PLANET.
    The day of this planet is Saturday:  its hour is the first hour when the sun rises that day and the eighth hour after sunrise.  And in case that the year shall begin on a Saturday, it will be dry and scarce of food; the spring will be very windy, the summer wet, the autumn dry and cool, the winter wearisome, windy, somewhat cold, and scarce of water.  It denotes, further, shortage of wheat, wine, oil, and less honey.  Flax will be scarce and dear; fruit will be plentiful, but fresh fish will not be so.  It denotes likewise that there will be much mention of marriage, and that many of the old houses will fall.  Fever will be powerful, and especially the tertian and the quartan, in many places in the world.  Death is near old people in this year, for the weather is against them.  It denotes death to the cattle (especially sheep), and the silk-worms.
  4. CONCERNING THE PHYSIOGNOMY WHICH COMES FROM THIS PLANET.
    Those who are born under the dominion of this planet are naturally cold and dry, large-faced and ugly.  Their eyes are moderate in size and directed towards the ground, but they have one eye larger than the other.  Nostrils fleshy, lips thick, brows close together, the color of their face brown, their hair black, crisp, wooly and somewhat curly; some of their teeth longer than others, breast hairy, legs long and crooked.  They are sinewy and dry-fleshed, their veins narrow though prominent.  And if this planet be in the west, the people will be small, spare-fleshed, scant-bearded, and with long straight hair.
  5. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES WHICH THIS PLANET SHEDS IN MAN
    The property of those who are born under this planet is to be deeply thoughtful, timid and fond of husbandry.  They are inconstant, sad, melancholic, deceitful, tricky (and, according to the philosophers, lecherous, owing to the excess of sperm which is generated in them).  They are fond of solitude and hate rejoicing.  They are angered by a trifling cause and difficult to part from their wrath; nevertheless, the wise man can guard himself against all these evil properties through the help of God and with the gift of free will.
  6. CONCERNING THE NATURAL INCLINATION OF THESE PEOPLE.
    They are inclined to letters and to learning, and especially to philosophy and the study of the understanding.  Further, to holy secrets, of the free and unfree sciences, namely, husbandry, masonry, shoemaking and glovemaking.  Others of them are inclined to inter corpses, and to every work that is made of earth.  They are zealous in seeking mines of mercury, lead and tin, and the antique treasures of the earth.  They make good friars, for they like solitude.  This planet is ninety-five times greater than the earth (according to Alfraganus).  Its metal is lead, its color is the color of ashes.  It governs the earth and is distant from it 28,089,750 leagues, and has a body of 589,680 leagues.
  7. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES OF THE PLANET WHICH IS CALLED JUPITER.
    The place of this planet is the sixth sphere.  Its property is to be warm, moist, airy, sanguinary, masculine, and it is very favorable to human nature, because it is itself naturally moderate, and so it purifies the air; whence it comes that the winds are wholesome, and the rain very profitable to the earth.  It moderates the heat in summer and the cold in winter, lessens diseases, banishes plagues, and assists growing things.  It makes folk to be peacefully disposed toward one another, and to be devout, especially those whose planet it is, that is, wise, honest, modest, generous, just, merciful, orderly, faithful, well-inclined, truthful, magnanimous, virtuous people; people who are right-lived, compassionate, generous, charitable; people who are fond of women, jolly, amiable; people who are well-shaped, handsome, wise; people who have the fear of God in their hearts and are vigilant and watchful for Him.
  8. CONCERNING THE PROGNOSTICATION OF THIS PLANET.
    This planet’s day is Thursday.  Its hour is the first hour of sunrise on that day and the eighth hour after that.  In the year which begins on this day, i.e., on Thursday, the Spring will be windy, the Summer moderate, the Autumn wet, and the Winter likewise moderate.  Wheat and food will be plentiful.  Small grain will be very plentiful and flax very scarce.  Wine will be abundant, and oil and honey scarce, but pork and fresh fish will be plentiful.  That year will be inclined to peace, but (as we have said) free will gives victory over its nature.
  9. CONCERNING THE PHYSIOGNOMY WHICH THIS PLANET GIVES.
    People who are born under the government of this planet are well-personed, shapely, white, inclined to be fair formed; their beards brown, curly and divided into two portions; their eyes red, weaksighted, black, handsome; faces broad and fleshy; teeth large and closely set; hair soft and thin, as a result of which they become bald on the top; veins long and prominent.
  10. CONCERNING THE QUALITIES OF THESE FOLK.
    They are very peaceful, honest, guileless, without duplicity in mind.  They are temperate as regards food and drink, virtuous, faithful, well-informed; they are not hostile or vengeful, nevertheless they are easily moved to wrath at a slight cause.  They fulfill their promises faithfully.  They transact their business with discretion.  They give good and salutary advice.  They understand everything easily, because they have clear intellects; they are prolific and healthy, and of good character.
  11. CONCERNING THE NATURAL INCLINATION OF THESE FOLK.
    They are inclined for the Church, to faith and devotion, because they are peaceable, virtuous, honest: in addition, they are inclined to be judges and literary people, councilors and careful of the poor, and for every other occasion deserving of charity.  Alfraganus says that this planet is 95 times greater than the earth.  Its metal is tin.  It governs the air.  It is distant from the earth 17,208,200 leagues, and has a body of 615,600 leagues.
  12. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES OF THE PLANET WHICH IS CALLED MARS.
    The place of this planet is the fifth sphere.  Its property is to be dry, warm, choleric, fiery, masculine and nocturnal.  It is hostile to human nature owing to its own evil nature.  It causes winds, disturbances, frost and great cold, hailstones and darkness, great heat in due season, immoderate winds, unwholesome and of evil properties.  And it is so perverse and harmful by nature, and that in such a way that it moves and inclines the mind of creatures against each other, until they are angry and contentious, disputations, erratic, blood-shedding, warring and hostile towards one another.  It inclines them likewise to be thievish, predatory, incendiary, murderous, unjust, abusive and quick-tempered.  This planet governs the warlike, the angry, treacherous, faithless and lying the drunkards, gluttonous and shameless, highwaymen, quarrelsome and contentious persons, those who are fond of weapons, who are quick-tempered, madmen, plunderers and robbers; the evil-intentioned, deceitful and distressed; the tricky, backbiting and calumnious; the envious, grasping, covetous; the treacherous, bloody, irascible, boastful.
  13. CONCERNING THE PROGNOSTICATION OF THIS PLANET.
    The day of this planet is Tuesday; its hour is the first hour and the eighth hour.  In the year which begins with this day, the spring will be wet, the summer hot, the autumn dry, and the winter cold, wet and dark, with much snow.  There will be a fortune by the seaside owing to the great number of shipwrecks.  It denotes damage to wheat and other grain, a moderate amount of oil and honey.  All kinds of legumes will be plentiful, little wine, a moderate amount of fruit, and many of the small cattle will die owing to the abundance of blood, and the heat which governs them in that year.  It denotes likewise many diseases and death to the female sex, and in addition it denotes sudden death, and that powerful nobles vitam cum morte commutabunt.  There will be strife and contention between tyrants.
  14. CONCERNING THE PHYSIOGNOMY WHICH THIS PLANET GIVES.
    Folk who are born under this planet have large faces, ugly, with small reddish spots in them; hair scant, red or fair; eyes inflamed, red and fleshy, and sight acute; nostrils large and broad; teeth clean, having spaces between them, incomplete; and they are small bearded, and with bent figures.  If this planet is in the west it denotes narrow necks, and weak legs which take long strides in walking: feet high-arched; ankles small, and heads large.
  15. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES OF THESE FOLK.
    They are irascible, ready at striking one, wanting in sense and in words.  They seek contention and are enemies of quietude.  They are fond of their own sort, of playing and of women.  They are lying, deceitful, perfidious, without compassion, thievish; but the wise man gains the victory over the influence of the stars and his own nature.
  16. CONCERNING THE NATURAL INCLINATION OF THESE FOLK.
    These are inclined to arms and fire, and accordingly they are inclined to be smiths, artificers, armourers, and mechanics of all kinds; they are fond of firearms, and of the manufacture of great and small guns, &c.  This planet is, according to Alfraganus, one and a half times greater than the earth, and an eighth part more.  It governs fire.  Its metal is iron and copper, and it is distant from the earth 2,379,000 leagues, and has a body of 10,530 leagues.
  17. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES OF THE PLANET WHICH IS CALLED SOL.
    Sol.
    The place of this planet is in the midst of the other planets, and in the fourth heaven or sphere, as lord and king over them, from which they all obtain their light.  The property of this planet, which is called Sol, i.e., the sun, is to be warm and dry moderately, diurnal and masculine.  From it comes that the fruits are ripe, and every other thing fulfilled in its own time.  It is because God has given it such power to advance things that Aristotle was moved to say: Sol et homo generant hominem, that is, that man and the sun generate man.  Hali speaks of this planet, and says that it is the cause of the growth of everything, and that it is it that generates the growing things and the animals.  It influences and moves people to be in a powerful, honorable, free position; and it governs another to be dignified and aiming at high rank.  It governs kings and powerful people, people who are grave, magnanimous and of good counsel; and every man who is a counselor to kings or prince.
  18. CONCERNING THE PROGNOSTICATION OF THIS PLANET.
    The day of this planet is Sunday, and its hour the first hour and the eighth.  In the year which begins on this day, the spring will be moderate, the summer very warm, the autumn windy, and the winter sharp.  Food will be plentiful and every sort of grain, and further, wine, oil, honey and fruits.  The cattle, small and great, will be plentiful.  This planet denotes contentions between nobles, and rumor about kings, and short life for the young, sed Deus super omnia.
  19. CONCERNING THE PHYSIOGNOMY WHICH THIS PLANET GIVES.
    Those who are born under the government of this planet are fair and fleshy: with round clear faces, mouth moderate, lips somewhat thick, brows narrow, teeth white and beautiful, nose straight and shapely; neck and bosom rounded; figure straight and shapely; they are very strong and powerful.
  20. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES OF THESE FOLK.
    They are grave, honest, generous, of good counsel, anxious that another should honor them.  They are princely in mind, well spoken, haughty, and having a great opinion of themselves.
  21. CONCERNING THE NATURAL INCLINATIONS OF THESE FOLK.
    These are inclined to be in an honorable position, and in high ranks governing other people; accordingly they are ready to be presidents, governors, captains, colonels, pilots and prelates; to be pastors over men and animals, but finally, they are inclined to every office and trade connected with silk, gold and silver.  This planet is, as Alfraganus says, 166 times greater than the earth.  It has dominion over fire.  Its metal is gold.  It is distant from the earth 1,213,333 leagues, and has a body of 1,075,680 leagues.
  22. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE PLANET WHICH IS CALLED VENUS.
  Venus.
    The place of this planet is the third sphere:  its property is to be cold and moist moderately, watery, feminine, nocturnal and somewhat phlegmatic.  It is favorable to human nature.  This is the star which most illumines the night after the moon, and which is usually called the morning star.  It is sometimes seen at sunrise, especially in the winter.  It has dominion over women, children, and musicians, well spoken people, happy, fortunate, just, wise, cheerful, grateful, merciful people; and over those who like to be neatly got up and showily dressed.
  23. CONCERNING THE PROGNOSTICATION OF THIS PLANET.
    The day of this planet is Friday:  its hour is the first hour and the eighth.  The year which begins on this day will not be lacking in water.  The spring will be windy, the summer moist and gentle, the autumn dry and windy in some places and very wet in others, and the winter cold and very laborious.  Food will be plentiful but dear.  The vine will be good and fruitful, and oil and honey plentiful.  It denotes disease of the eyes, and the death of many children by smallpox, and that many of the small cattle will die, and that there will be earthquakes in many places.
  24. CONCERNING THE PHYSIOGNOMY WHICH THIS PLANET GIVES.
    Those who are born under the government of this planet have fat, round, red faces; eyes black, sparkling and merry; brows black and joined; hair smooth and long, and, in some others of them, curled, and there is usually a mark on their faces; noses curved, mouth medium, upper lip smaller than the lower lip; neck handsome but narrow; persons small and spare; legs heavy; and if this planet is in the east it makes their bodies fat, fair and of handsome stature; if it is in the west they will be small-bodied and bald-headed.
  25. CONCERNING THE NATURAL INCLINATION OF THESE FOLK.
    These are inclined for idleness, and arts which are light, curious, showy, such assigning, and harping; accordingly, they are given to poetry, the organ, choirs, painting, the making of laces and gold thread, &c., and besides they are given to Comedy, i.e., a very public art.
  26. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES OF THESE FOLK.
    These are of a warm, moist, phlegmatic nature; they are eloquent, prudent and fortunate, grateful, amiable, affectionate, just, sweet-spoken, fond of music, dancing and pastimes, idle games, fornication, self-adornment and dressing and making clothes; finally, they like to be treated well and joyously, and to have perfumed clothes, and it is seldom they give themselves to learning.  This planet is, according to Alfraganus, 37 times smaller than the earth.  Its metal is copper.  It has dominion over the private parts of men and women.  It is distant from the earth 325,656 leagues, and has a mass of its own of 175 leagues.
  27. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE PLANET WHICH IS CALLED MERCURIUS.
  Mercurius.
    The place of this planet is the second sphere.  Its property is to be masculine, diurnal and of a changeable nature; because it takes its property from the planet with which it conjoins, or to which it is nearest, in such a way that if it be near a good planet its property will be good, and if it be near a bad planet its property will be bad; for we see that daily, viz., people of that property, that they are good with the good, and bad with the bad.  This planet governs the poets, writers, lawyers, painters, mathematicians and those who discover new things, goldsmiths and silversmiths, and finally those who are eager for bargaining and buying.
  28. CONCERNING THE PROGNOSTICATION OF THIS PLANET.
    The day of this planet is Wednesday:  its hour is the first hour and the eighth.  In the year which commences on this day, the spring will be wet and not very good, the summer very hot, the autumn moderate, and the winter sharp, but it will not be very cold.  Wheat and every other grain will be moderate, the vintage will be good and the oil plentiful, but it denotes scarcity of every other sort of food, and famine in places.  In the autumn it denotes the death of some prominent person, and that pregnant women will lost their children prematurely, and some of them will have still-born children at birth; the fiery fever will be common; and headache, and there will be much talk and mention of great novelties in this year.
  29. CONCERNING THE PHYSIOGNOMY OF THESE FOLK.
    Those who are born under this planet are of handsome person, medium, spare-fleshed; faces narrow, well-proportioned, long-jawed; noses long and pointed; eyes small and not very dark; eyebrows long and extended; beard thin and dark; lips thin; hair long and curled at the end; teeth irregular, and fingers long.
  30. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES OF THESE FOLK.
    These are sharp-witted, earnest, wise; they discover new things easily; they transact their business punctually; they are fitted for every trade and art, and fond of travelling in foreign lands, &c.
  31. CONCERNING THE NATURAL INCLINATION OF THESE FOLK. 
    They are inclined to be professors, writers, painters and sculptors; some of them to be mathematicians, arithmeticians, merchants and matchmakers, &c.  This planet is (according to Alfraganus) much smaller than the moon, and the moon is much smaller than the earth, as we shall say in its own place.  Its metal is quicksilver, and it is distant from the earth 125,185 leagues, and has a mass of 1,000 miles, which is equal to 200 Italian leagues.
  32. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES OF THE PLANET WHICH IS CALLED LUNA, i.e. THE MOON.
  Luna.
    The place of this planet is the first sphere which is nearest to us; its property is to be cold, moist, watery, nocturnal, feminine.  It is said that it is the cause of all damp and moisture, and of the growth of growing things, from the superabundance of moisture of this planet which it sheds into those creatures.  Many learned authors have been wearied by the close scrutiny of the property and nature of this planet; and it is only putting sand in a withe, or pouring out the ocean by drops; for its nature is so changeable, so wonderful, and so mysterious, that it is not possible to find out all about it; nevertheless, since it is a matter in hand, we shall endeavor to exhibit a little of it generally.  In the first place it must be noted that there is a great distinction between the operation of this planet when waxing and when waning; accordingly, wise and knowing people keep sharp account of the crescent or new moon, and likewise of its full or waning, on account of many things connected with husbandry, and with bodily health; for Pliny says, Lib. 18, Cap. 32, that the time for reaping, cutting and pruning everything is the full of the moon, i.e., from full moon to new, so that they may keep better.  Accordingly, the timber which is cut at the crescent moon rots in a short time, if it is a tree which loses its foliage.  And the animals which are castrated at the crescent moon are in danger, and the cereals and fruits which are gathered at the crescent moon (according to Palladius) are not substantial or lasting or profitable, as they would be if they were gathered at the full of the moon.  Another wonderful property of the moon is to be noted likewise, and that is, if one wishes the year to be one for males, let him allow the males to approach the females at the waxing of the moon; and if eggs are put under a hen or another bird at the crescent moon the cocks will be more numerous; and if he wishes the contrary let him do these things at the full moon.  Another wonder touching the new moon, as the Italian Jacobus Palermo says, if anyone wishes to know accurately the point at which the moon comes into conjunction, let him take a silver cup and put sea brine in it, and ashes made from the olive tree, i.e., the tree from which oil is made, and let him keep a sharp lookout about the time of new moon, and at the point at which it comes the ashes will be moved on the brine so that there will be plainly a turbidity in the cup.  The same author gives a reason for that, saying that this happens because of the very close government which the moon has over silver, sea water and the olive tree beyond every other thing.  Accordingly they perceive and move at its coming, showing the nature which they have from this planet.  This planet has dominion over sailors and mariners, the phlegmatic, laze weak-hearted and sluggards.
  33. CONCERNING THE PROGNOSTICATION OF THIS PLANET.
    The day of the moon is Monday; its hour is the first hour and the eighth.  In the year which begins on this day there will be no lack of water; the spring will be cool, the summer moderate, the autumn very wet, and the winter mild.  It denotes scarcity of wheat but plenty of other grain; a moderate amount of wine and oil.  It denotes many diseases of cattle, so that the nations will wonder, and further, there will be diseases on people and schisms between the powerful.  Women will suffer much in this year from their own disease, i.e., Suffocatio matricis.  Neither honey nor silk will do well this year because many bees and silkworms will die.
  34. CONCERNING THE PHYSIOGNOMY OF THOSE WHOSE PLANET IS THE MOON.
    These are very white and phlegmatic; face broad, round, blooming; eyes medium, squinting, sleepy, and one eye larger than the other.  They usually have spots on their faces; their brows close together; noses stubby, and mouths small.
  35. CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES OF THESE FOLK.
    These are inconstant, virtuous, sleepy, subject to minor ailments, harmless.  They are inclined to be mariners and travel by water; they are sluggish and unenterprising.
  36. CONCERNING THE NATURAL INCLINATION OF THESE FOLK.
    They are inclined to changeable things, because they themselves are so.  They are apt to be fishermen, tavern-keepers, and to be selling food and drink and such like.  This planet (according to Alfraganus) is 39 times smaller than the earth.  Its metal is silver.  It has dominion over the salt water of the sea, and over the olive tree.  it is distant from the earth 9,847 leagues, and has a body of its own of 166 leagues.
    In accordance with the signs and the physiognomy which the planets give to those who are born under their government it is possible for every man to know his own planet, and better if he looks at his own natural inclination; for if it be the nature of Mars which he shall perceive in himself, it is certain that that is his planet, and if it be the nature of Jupiter he shall feel in himself, that is his planet, and so on with the other planets.
  37. ANOTHER WONDER OF THE MOON TOUCHING THE FLOW AND EBB OF THE SEA.
    Among all other things which the moon causes there is one of them very wonderful—namely, the flow and ebb of the sea, which flows twice and ebbs twice in the space of 24 hours and a little more, by the motion of the moon, and by accurate computation each flow and each ebb lasts six hours and the fifth part of an hour.  This flow and ebb takes place on the whole coast of the sea which is called Mare Oceanum, and in part of the sea (called) Mediterraneum, so that sometimes much land is exposed.  Accordingly it is necessary for mariners to know these, and when they commence, so that they may come safe to land through the strait narrow ways.  it is no less fitting that the physicians should know these secrets, for Pliny wrote and petrus Aponiensis says that it is when the sea is ebbing that all men and animals die which die a natural death; certainly a secret which is worth noting.  In order that it may be known perpetually at what hour of day or night the flow or ebb of the sea beings, let the age of the moon be noted and the day on which it is desired to find out the hour when the flow and ebb commences; let one look it up in the appended table in the first column to the left-hand side, and opposite it on the right-hand side is found the hour when the flow and ebb commences, noting that the letter M means morning or before midday, and the letter T evening or after midday, that the letters ME signify midday, and the letters NO night.
  43. ANOTHER WONDER AND THE PROGNOSTICATION OF THE MOON AND OF THE SIGNS AS REGARDS FOOD.
    If the moon of the month of January enters the sign of Aquarius when waxing it denotes plenty of food in that year; and if it is waning when it enters it, it denotes poverty, sorrow and hardship, overflow of rivers, and great storms at sea.
    If the moon of February enters the sign Pisces when waxing, it will cause things to be at a cheap price and easily obtained; and if it is waning when it enters it, it denotes abundance of rain that year.
    If the moon of March enters the sign of Aries when waxing, and it is to the north, it denotes insipidity and restlessness; and if it is waning when it enters it, it denotes a good fruitful year.
    If the moon of April enters the sign Taurus when waxing, it denotes much good, contentment and joy; if it enters it waning, it denotes the opposite.
    If the moon of May enters the sign Gemini when waxing, it denotes commotion, trouble and change in the regions whose sign that is; and if it is waning when it enters it, it denotes much rain.
    If the Moon of June enters Cancer when waxing, it denotes change, commotion and everything turned topsy turvey in the empire of Africa; and if it is waning when it enters it, it denotes much rain.
    If the moon of July enters Leo when waxing, it denotes good and great profit to husbandmen; and if it is waning when it enters it, it denotes hardship, danger and diseases.
    If the moon of August enters Virgo when waxing, it denotes whirlwinds, storms and earthquake; and if it is waning when it enters it, it denotes a good prosperous year as regard food.
    If the moon of September enters Libra when waxing, it denotes plenty of all sorts of grain; but if it is waning when it enters it, it denotes storms and disturbances.
    If the moon of October enters Scorpio when waxing, it denotes enmity and strife between lawyers, and envy; but if it waning when it enters it, it denotes a prosperous and plentiful year in the regions whose sign it is.
    If the moon of November enters Sagittarius when waxing, there will be no lack of water or oil that year; but if it is waning when it enters it, it denotes famine and likelihood of plague.
    If the moon of December enters Capricorn when waxing, it denotes great storms at sea; and if it is waning when it enters it, it denotes contentment and joy for the husbandmen who labor the ground.  But be it noted [with regard to] every thing signified here, that it is in the regions which these signs govern that it will happen more particularly than in other places; and if it be desired to find out which regions are under the government of each sign, that will be found in the place where we shall treat of the signs themselves.
  THE FIFTH CHAPTER
  1. WHICH SHOWS THE PROPERTIES OF THE TWELVE SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC.
    In the ninth sphere (which is called Chrystallinum) the astronomers postulate a circulum i.e., a round ring which they call zodiacum, of 360 degrees altogether, and of 12 degrees in width, and they divide this into 12 equal parts which are called the twelve signs of the Zodiac; and there are 30 degrees in each of these signs; and the names of those signs are Aries, Taur5us, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpius, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, and Piscis.  These names were given to them because of the properties which they give to the creatures when the sun enters them.  They are called another name, viz., the House of the Planets, because when a planet happens to be in its own sign (i.e., in its own house) it is more powerful and more vigorous than when it is in another sign; and the length of each sign is 273,870,047 leagues, and the breadth of each sign 22,818,258 leagues; and if it be desired to find out about the houses of the planets, we shall tell that briefly; for the sign which is called Leo is the house of the sun, Cancer the house of the moon, Capricornus and Aquarius the houses of Saturn, Pisces and Sagittarius the houses of Jupiter, Aries and Scorpio the houses of Mars, Libra and Taurus the houses of Venus, Gemini and Virgo the houses of Mercury.  When the sun enters these signs it has a change of property according to the nature of each sign, as shall be shown in its own place; likewise there will be shown the property and the natural secret of these houses or these signs, and the things which they produce in sick or delicate people when the moon enters them.
  2. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN AQUARIUS WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 21ST OF JANUARY.
    The form or figure which astronomers give to this sign is the form of a man pouring water out of a vessel; nevertheless it is not because it is so in reality (for it is not so at all) but because of the abundance of water which falls.  The property of this sign is [to be] warm and moist, and it is the cause of immoderate heat and moisture.  It is very harmful, for it works corruption on the air and consequently damage to the plants and growing things.  The sun enters this sign on the 21st day of January usually, i.e., on the 11th day of the same month here in Ireland (be it noted that this book is entirely after the method of the Pope, nevertheless profit may be derived here by taking account of the difference of ten days of time between [the reckonings] until the year 1700, and from that onward there is the difference of 11 days between them).  This sign is airy, masculine, diurnal; it is a diurnal house and exaltation for Saturn, and nocturnal detriment to the sun.  This sign governs the provinces of Aragon, Bohemia, Saxony, Ethiopia, Dalmatia, Arabia, Sogdiana, Azania, Piamonte, and India; the cities Constantia, Jerusalem, Urbino, Pavia, and Monserrat; in Spain the cities Zamora, Medina, Valencia, and Seville.  The man who is born under the dominion of this sign will be of medium stature, wellspoken, secretive, stouthearted in going ahead with any project he may set before him; it signifies that he will receive a blow from iron and be in danger by water; he will be given to travel in foreign lands, and he will succeed better there than in his own country; it signifies that if he returns he will be fortunate and wealthy; but let him beware of getting angry, for it would be injurious for him.  In certo quodam anno erit in dubio vitae suae, because it signifies for him a grievous illness before the thirtieth year; and if he recovers from it, it signifies according to his nature and complexion 58 years of life.  If it is a woman which shall be born under it, it signifies that she will be industrious and regardful of herself; she will be in danger of death and in addition once again by water.  She will not spend her goods easily, and she will find her life better about the middle of her age; nevertheless, before the 38th year it signifies for her two illnesses; the first illness at the end of the 34th year, and the other illness at the end of the 35th year; and if she recovers from them it signifies for her naturally 82 years of life.
  3. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN PISCIS WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 19TH OF FEBRUARY.
    The figure and form given to this sign is two fishes, so that (as it is the nature of the fish to be wet and in the water usually) similarly when the sun enters this sign the weather is wet and watery.  This sign is feminine, nocturnal, watery and common to the winter and the spring.  It is of a wet and watery nature, on which account it is the cause of cold and moisture immoderately, which does harm to the water of the rivers, the wells and the lakes, for it makes corruption in them.  This sign is the house of the day and night for Jupiter, exaltation for Venus, fall and nocturnal detriment and sorrow to Mercury.  This sign has government over the provinces of Persia, Hibernia, Normandia, Portugallia, Lydia, Sicilia, Pamphylia Garamantes, Mesamenes:  over the cities Colonia, Agrippina, Venecia, Ratisbona, and Alexandria; in Spain, over the cities Orense, Santiago and part of Seville.  The man who is born under this sign is fond of foreign countries and travelling by water; he is of a great appetite, and on that account will be in danger of death unless his planet help him; he will be taciturn; it denotes a sickness for him at the end of his fifteenth year, and another sickness at the end of the thirtieth, and the third sickness at the end of his 38th year of life, and if he recovers from them it is natural for him to have 65 years of life.  The woman who is born under it is religious, honest, bashful; but she will suffer from inflammation of the eyes and suffocatio matricis:  it signifies that she will receive hurt from fire, and that she will be sick at the end of her 12th year, and once again at the end of her 20th and 21st years, and again at the end of her 30th; but it signifies 59 years of life.
  4. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN ARIES WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 21ST DAY OF MARCH.
    The figure and form which is given to this sign is a ram.  It is of the nature of fire, warm and dry; accordingly it causes heat and drought moderately.  It is diurnal, mobile and masculine.  It is the house of Mars, exaltation for Sol, fall for Saturn and detriment for Venus:  the sun enters it on the 21st of March and then commences the first Equinox, in which the length of day and night are equal.  It governs the provinces Anglia, Gallia, alemania, and Polonia Minor; the cities Florencia, Napoles, patavia, Favencia, Cracovia, Inmola, Pergamo; in Spain, Zaragoza, Tortosa and Valladolid.
    The man who is born under the government of this sign is intellectual, wise, of magnanimous mind; nevertheless he is talkative, irascible, but easily appeased:  it is characteristic of him to be talking to himself, not too rich nor too poor, faithful to his friends; he will have enough to subsist on mortuorum causa; it signifies that there will be a special mark on his body and that he will get a beating from a fourfooted beast, and another blow from iron; but finally he will be unfortunate, hardworked; he will be sick at the end of his 22nd year, and, if he gets over that, then forsan ducet uxorem and he will get according to his nature 75 years of life.
    The woman who is born under it will be irascible and very lively and vivacious in her actions, pleasing according to other people’s opinions; nevertheless it signifies, if she marries, that she will be a widow, and that she will suffer from a dangerous disease of the head or knee from the seventh year of her age until the twelfth, but that she will get of natural life 49 years.  This sign signifies both for man and woman that they will come to be very poor, nevertheless they will achieve independence through their own good industry.
  5. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN TAURUS WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 20TH DAY OF APRIL.
    The figure or form given to this sign is a bull.  Its property is earthy, cold and dry.  it causes coldness and dryness, nevertheless moderately, whence it comes that sentient things are begotten and growing things grow when the sun enters it.  This sign is nocturnal, feminine.  it is the house of Venus and her joy, exaltation to Luna, and detriment and sorrow to Mars.  It has dominion over the provinces Persia, Media, Suycia, Asia Minor, Hibernia, Egypt, Armenia, and Cyprus:  over the cities Capua, Salerno, Bolonia, Sena, Verona, Ancona, Treveres, parma, Mantua and Palermo; in Spain, over Gitona, Osca, Toro, Badajos, Astorga, and Jaen.  The man who is born under the dominion of this sign will be bold, proud, haughty, and of highly vain heart; inclined to leave his country and travel in a foreign land, where he will succeed better, and if he marries he will get means with his wife; he will be fortunate, and in an important position:  it signifies that he will receive an injury from dogs, and danger by water, and in addition, unless he take care, he will receive infortunia mulierum causa, and that he will be sick at the end of his 12th year and again at 30, and once again at 40, and if he recovers from these he will get naturally 64 years of life.  It signifies that the woman who is born under it will be very busy, careful in worldly things, economic, partial to foreign lands; she will be fertile and have many sons, et plures indicat ei habere maritos; it signifies a fall from a height, and sickness at the end of her 16th year, and once again at 33.  This sign promises naturally 66 years of life.
  6. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN GEMINI WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 21ST DAY OF MAY.
    The form or figure given to this sign is two children embracing each other in a very friendly way, denoting the mildness of the weather when the sun enters it.  This sign is of an airy, warm, wet nature; accordingly it is suitable for growing things.  It is the house of Mercury, detriment and sorrow to Jupiter.  It is masculine, diurnal, and is warm and dry in the spring usually; but it is dry then moderately.  It has dominion over the provinces Hircania, Cyrenaica, Marmatica, part of Egypt, Armenia Margiana; over the cities Trent, Cessena, Viterbo, Nuremberg, Bruges, Leon of France and Maguncia; in Spain, over Ciguenca, Morviedra, Cordova, and Talavera.  The man who is born under this sign is goodhearted and generous; inclined for other lands and travelling in them; he will be wealthy and steadfast in the things which he promises, will be earnest, and in danger by water; it will be necessary for him to beware of mad dogs, and I enjoin him to be watchful of himself for it signifies that he will have many wounds, and that he will be sick four times before he comes to 30 years, and if he recovers from them that he will be more healthy, and that he will get 68 years of life.  The woman who is born under it will be very faithful, and well thought of by other people, and will be inclined for marriage; she will receive sorrow and regret for wrong done to her, and she will not be free from ill health, and she will get 62 years of natural life.
  7. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN CANCER WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 22ND OF JUNE.
    The figure or form given to this sign is a certain fish which is called Cancer, and it is of a watery, cold, wet, feminine, nocturnal and mobile nature, because when the sun enters it the weather changes to damp and moderate cold, so that it is good for growth.  It is the house of the day and the night to the Moon, exaltation to Jupiter, detriment to Saturn, and fall to Mars.  it has dominion over the provinces Numedia, Holland, Norvegia, Zelanda, Bithonia, Burgundia, Scotia, Rhodes, Lydia, Ethiopia, Africa, Colgis, and Phrygia; over the cities Constantinople, Milan, Pisa, Lucca, Venice, Tunis, and Genova; in Spain, over Compostela, Lisbon, Granada, and Barcelona.  The man who is born under it is of medium stature, merry and humble; it signifies that he will get trouble by law, and that he will be inclined toward that and to defend the case of another person, and that he will be very spend-thrift; it signifies dangers by water, fire and iron; and that he will be bold and well esteemed; it signifies for him minor ailments, and that he will get 73 years of natural life.  The woman who is born under it will be earnest, industrious, swift to wrath and to recover from it, grateful, amiable:  children numerous and troubles about them; it denotes that she will get a fall from a height and will find hidden things but of small value; she will be healthy and will get 70 years of natural life.
  8. CONCERNING  THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN LEO WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 23RD OF JULY.
    The figure which is given to this sign is a lion.  It is of a warm and excessively dry nature, masculine, diurnal, fixed, because when the sun enters it the heat is complete and steadfast, and it cause the destruction and withering of the growing things.  It is the house of the night and day to Sol, detriment and sorrow to Saturn.  It has dominion over the [following] provinces, i.e., over some of Sicily, and some of Apulia, Bohemia, and the coasts of the Red Sea, Chaldea, Italy, Greece, Turkey, Propontis, the Alps and Macedonia; over the cities Rome, Ravenna, Cremona, Usma, Croton, Damascus and Prague; in Spain, over Murcia and Leon.  The man who is born under it will be shapely, handsome, magnanimous, proud, eloquent; and if he gives himself to learning will be wise; it signifies that he will get high positions, and that he will travel in many countries; and if he marries he will get something to spend with his wife; it signifies that he will get a severe blow from iron, and danger from water, and he will be lucky at getting wealth and sometimes inveniet pecuniam absconditam; it signifies for him six illnesses during his life, but the most dangerous illness of them is at the end of his 40th year, and if he gets over it this sign promises him 71 years of natural life.  The woman who is born under it will be handsome, ill-mannered, strong, haughty; it signifies that she will suffer from stomach trouble, and that she will be fond of honor, and will be rich, but will be merciful to the poor, and prone to menorrhagia and many other diseases, but to it especially, and she will get naturally 71 years of life.
  9. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN VIRGO WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 24TH OF AUGUST.
    The figure or form of this sign is a virgin, signifying the unfruitfulness of the earth at this time.  It is of an earthy, cold, dry nature; it is feminine, nocturnal, melancholic, and common to summer and autumn.  It is the house, joy and exaltation of Mercury; fall to Venus, and nocturnal detriment to Jupiter.  It governs the provinces Greece, part of Phenicia and Babylonia, Assyria, Mesopotamia, Cicilia, Rhodes and Candia; the cities Pavia, Paris, Ferrara, Toulouse, Pasencia and Corinth; in Spain, Lerida, Toledo, Avilla and Algecira.  The man who is born under it is honorable, chaste and of honorable condition; it signifies that he will be earnest and careful about his business, and striving for high rank; in addition, it signifies that he will be modest, changeable, and after being rich that he will come to great poverty, from not being wise enough to govern himself; he will suffer from a few diseases until 30 years of age, and if he escapes from them his nature is to have 84 years of life.  The woman who is born under it is modest, earnest, devout; it signifies that she will fall from a height, and that she will be delicate; she will be anxious to be clean and chaste, and she will come to have hardships; it signifies a dangerous illness from the 30th year to the 36th, and if she escapes from it she will get 77 years of natural life.
  10. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN LIBRA WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 23RD OF SEPTEMBER.
    The figure given to this sign is a balance of two scales, signifying the equality of days and nights about that time; and when the sun enters it the second equinox takes place, in which the night and day are of equal length. This sign is of the nature of the air, i.e., warm and moist.  It is the cause of heart and thick moisture; accordingly it causes the air to coagulate so that it is harmful to every beast, and it generates many diseases.  It is the house of the day of Venus, fall to Sol, exaltation to Saturn, and detriment to Mars.  It has dominion over the provinces Austria, Casperia, Bactriana Regio, Tuscia, and Syria; over the cities Valencia, Lodi, Parma, Gaeta, Viana and Augusta; in Spain, over Burgos, Almeria, and Salamanca.  The man who is born under this sign is honorable, courageous, and important in his deeds, inclined for foreign lands, where he will succeed better than in his own country; it signifies that he will have something to spend, but that he will find poverty and hardship; it signifies a sickness for him at the end of his 18th year, and once again at 35, and the first sickness at the end of his 6th year, and if he escapes from them he will get 77 years of natural life.  The woman who is born under it will be merry and familiar:  it signifies that she will get a wound of the foot from fire, and that she will be inclined to travel in the world, and if she escapes from the fated sickness she will get 66 years of natural life.
  11. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN SCORPIO WHICH THE SUN  ENTERS ON THE 24TH OF OCTOBER.
    The figure which is given to this sign is a poisonous beast which has a sting with which it does harm, as it does with its mouth, signifying that the sun, when it enters it, does the like, causing cold and storms, thunders and lightnings.  It is of a nature wet, cold, feminine, nocturnal and fixed, because the autumn is then in its strength.  It is the house of the night and joy to Mars, fall to Luna, detriment and sorrow to Venus.  This sign has dominion over the provinces Scotia, and over the coasts of the sea, Syria, Mauretania, Getulia, Cappadocia, and Judea; over the cities Messina, Padua, Aquilea, Crema, and Buxia; in Spain, over Valencia, Xativa, Segovia, Tudela, Braga, Malaga, and Burgos.  The man who is born under it will be of evil nature, deceitful, adulterous, violent, double-minded and thievish; he will be grave, friendly, sweet-spoken, though malicious.  Sed sapiens dominabitur astris.  It signifies that he will be prone to disease in his stomach and testicles, and that he will incur danger from stone and iron; he will be inclined for other lands and will be guileful and flattering in his words and in his actions without the knowledge of others; and he will not be very rich or very poor; he will suffer from petty ailments, but he will get naturally 61 years of life.  The woman who is born under it will be friendly, but she will be strong and haughty, and it signifies that habeat cicatrices in maximum periculum vitae, and that she will frequently suffer from stomach trouble and will be delicate, but naturally she will get 72 years of life.
  12. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN SAGITTARIUS WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 23RD OF NOVEMBER.
    The figure of this sign is an archer shooting arrows, signifying how the sign acts when the sun enters it, throwing rains, hail, thunder and fiery balls.  It is of the nature of fire, warm and dry, masculine, diurnal, and common to autumn and winter.  It is the house of the day and joy to Jupiter, and daily detriment to Mercury.  It has dominion over the provinces Hispania, Arabia Felix, Sclavonia, Dalmatia, Helvetia, and part of Liguria; over the cities, Malta, Avignon, Jerusalem, Asta, and Milan; in Spain over Jaen, Calahorra, and Medina Celi.  The man who is born under the dominion of this sign is modest, honest, upright, fortunate; it signifies that he will be inclined to go on the sea, on which he will find a better fortune.  It signifies that he will receive harm from a fourfooted animal, and sickness at the end of the seventh year of his age and again at 18, but if he escapes from them he will get 67 years of life.  The woman who is born under it will be taciturn, fearful, shy and rich, and she will be called the mother of children; but the woman and the man likewise will be changeable, unsteady, nevertheless they will be merciful and conscientious.  The woman will have a sickness at the end of her fourth year, once again at 22, and once again at the end of her 40th year, and if she escapes from them she will get 57 years of natural life.
  13. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THE SIGN CAPRICORNUS WHICH THE SUN ENTERS ON THE 22ND OF DECEMBER.
    The figure which is given to this sign is a goat which goes into high places, signifying that, when the sun enters it, it is rising towards us and the days getting longer.  It is of an earthy nature, cold and dry, feminine, nocturnal and mobile; for the autumn passes and the winter begins.  It is the house of the night for Saturn, exaltation for Mars, fall for Jupiter, and detriment for Luna.  it has dominion over the provinces Macedonia, Bavaria, Portugal, Romandiola, Albania, Muscovy, Gedrocia, Thrace, Croatia, India, and part of Sclavonia; over the cities Verona, Forlivio, Savoy, Favencia, and Consatantinople; in Spain over Tortosa, Soria, and Carmona.  The man who is born under it will be wrathful, vain, lying.  It signifies that he will be talking to himself; he will be melancholic, greathearted, inclined to war, et gaudebit bonis alienis, et habebit curam de animalibus quadri-pedibus.  It signifies that he will find trouble causa mulierum, will be delicate, and will get 77 years of natural life.  The woman who is born under it will be of an exceedingly perverse nature, and will be very extravagant; it signifies that a fourfooted animal will bite her, and danger of falling from a height; she will be sick, but lightly, and will get naturally 69 years of life.
  14. ASTRONOMICAL RULE FOR KNOWING THE SIGN OF THE HOUR IN WHICH A PERSON IS BORN.
    To know these, figures and such like are no longer necessary, but only to pay heed to three things, viz., first, a knowledge of the sign in which the sun will be on the day on which the person will be born; secondly, a knowledge of the hour in which the sun rises that day; thirdly, an accurate knowledge of the hour in which he was born.  After knowing these three things, one must see how many hours have elapsed from the rising of the sun until the hour in which he was born exclusive, (that is to say, not to reckon the hour the sun rose).  Then reckon a sign for every two of those hours, from the sign in which the sun will be that day to the sign of the hour in which he was born inclusive, and in this way the natural sign of every person will be found.  And in case there should be an hour over [i.e., after dividing by two] to the hours from sunrise to the hour of his birth, let it be reckoned to the sign following; and in case it does not amount to a full hour, let no scruple be made of that, for the rule is not faulty on that account.  It is easy to understand everything when it is illustrated by an example:  accordingly I say that the person who was born on the 4th of August, at one o’clock p.m., his sign is Scorpio (I mean a person who was born in Valencia); because the sun rises there at 5 o’clock about that time, and from 5 till 1 p.m. is eight hours, which signifies four signs; and as it is in the sign Leo the sun was that day, I count four signs from it inclusive, and that is Scorpio.  Another example of a person who was born in Italy the 10th day of October, at half-past eleven p.m., and according to the rule I say that Gemini is his sign; for about that time the sun here is in the sign Libra, and it rises in Italy then at half-past five, and from half-past five till half past eleven p.m. is eighteen hours, which signifies nine signs, and the ninth sign from the sign Libra is the sign Gemini which we have said, and that is the proper sign of that person.  And in case that curiosity should inquire of what use are those signs, or what nature do they give, our reply is that the signs are common and general to every man who is born in the month which they serve; and although they have great influence over the person born in that month, yet that is little compared with the nature given by the sign of the hour in which he was born, for it is by that that his property and his nature are best judged.  Be it noted that if a person is born before the sun has risen, that belongs to the day before; for it is from sunrise that the Astrologers begin the day.
  THE SEVENTH CHAPTER.
  1. CONCERNING ANOTHER NATURAL PROGNOSTICATION OF THE TIME ACCORDING TO ARISTOTLE, PLINY AND PTOLEMY, WHICH IS VERY RELIABLE.
  Of the Comets and their Properties in General.
    Comets (according to famous philosophers) are clear-shining, hot, dry fumes (which are called exhalationes) which are drawn by the excessive heat of the sun to the upper regions of the air, and then from being so near to the other element fire, and the air moving them, they kindle, and according as they are dense or rare they last without dissipating.  These signs, or these comets, signify according to the same authors, misfortunes, such as war, strifes, famine, injury, plagues and death of princes and powerful people.  Be it noted that it is by the form and color of the comets that the things may be known which they signify, and in the case of eclipses by their colors.  Accordingly, if the comet or the eclipse be dark, and as one might think greenish, it will be of the nature of Saturn, and so it signifies death, plague, great cold, frost and snow, dark air, storm, whirlwinds, earthquake, flood and famine.  If it is reddish in color, it will be of the nature of Jupiter, and so signifies death of kings and of a powerful man.  The form of this comet is to be great, round, and like a human face as it were.  If its color be red and flaming, and a long tail to it, it will be of the nature of Mars, and if it is in the east, and its tail up over its head, that signifies in the west great famine, war, earthquake, damage to water, and destruction of cities and kingdoms.  If its color be very pale, and it be terrible to see and close to the sun, it will be of the nature of the sun, and so signifies change of lordship, damage to fruits, death to kings and rich and powerful people.  If it be golden in color, it will be of the nature of Venus, and if its appearance be like the moon, and long-haired and leaving rays behind it, it signifies harm to powerful people, new beliefs, and especially in those places towards which it points its tail.  If its color be blue, or if it be of many colors, and of small body with a long tail, it will be of the nature of Mercury: accordingly it signifies the death of a great prince, schism, war, famine, much thunder, and lightning along with the thunder.  If it be silver colored, and that more shining than the color of the other stars, it will be of the nature of Luna, i.e., of the nature of the moon, and so signifies plenty of food, and especially if Jupiter happens at that time to be in the sign Cancer or Pisces; and be it noted, if the comet be seen in the east, that it will produce its effect very shortly in the lands which are under the dominion of the sign with which it appears, and if it shall be seen in the west it will have its effect more slowly.
  2. CONCERNING THE CANICULAR DAYS AND THE TIME THEY BEGIN AND END.
    Because I think that there are many who would like to learn what is the cause of these canicular days, or what time they begin and end, we shall show briefly these three things.  Tere are found, then, in the eighth sphere two constellations, i.e., two sets of stars, which are called Canis Minor and Canis Major, i.e., the lesser dog and the greater dog, and they are of the nature of Mars.  But Canis Minor, in which are two stars according to Ptolemy, is of the nature of Mars and Mercury.  Distinguished authors say that Canis Minor is the cause of these days namely, Pliny, Lib. 18, cap. 28, and King Alfonsus in tabulis astronomicis, and let us follow their opinion, for we see that it is nearest to reason and experience.  This Canis Minor rises along with the sun on the horizon of Valencia (horizon means the amount of earth which is in the compass of the vision of every man) when that planet enters the first degree of the sign Leo, and it does that every year on the 24th July, and accordingly these canicular days begin in Valencia about that time, and they end on the second day of September.  It is the common opinion of astronomers and physicians that these days last for 40 days, i.e., the time occupied by the sun from the time of rising with Canicula (i.e., the little dog) until it traverses the whole sign of Leo.  This space of time is so harsh and hurtful that Hippocrates, in advising physicians, said that they should not give any treatment to sick folk about that time.  Pliny says in his Natural History, Lib. 2, that wine changes at this time, and that dogs get rabid from the excessive heat and dryness caused by the sun together with the sign Leo (its natural proper house) and with Canicula, about this time; and accordingly I pray every man to watch himself well about this time, and to give enough water to the dogs, and to make them swim, in order that their natural heat may be subdued, for that is very hurtful, and may God save us from it all. Amen.  
  Cities and Towns  Days and Months.  Cities and Towns of Spain.  Days and Months of Spain.                        
  Valencia    24 July     Villena         23 July
  Mallorca    24 July     Alicante        23 July
  Origuela    22 July     Sevilla         22 July
  Minorca   24 July     Lisbon          24 July
  Cordova     23 July     Calatrava       24 July
  Cartagena   23 July     Alcantara       24 July
  Murcia      22 July     Barcelona       25 July
  Granada   22 July     Toledo          25 July
  Malaga      22 July     Madrid          25 July
  Ubeda     23 July     Cuenca          25 July   
    This is a table which shows the hour the canicular days begin in the above cities.
  4. YEARLY PROGNOSTICATION OF THE DAY ON WHICH THE CANICULA BEGINS.
    The author Diaferes wrote that if it is in Aries the moon is on the day that Canicula beings (i.e., rises), there will be much water in the following year, little wheat, abundance of oil, but death of cattle.  If it is in Taurus that the moon is on that day, the wheat will be scarce, there will be much rain, hail—a laborious and wretched year.  If it is in Gemini that it is, bread, wine and fruit will be plentiful, but diseases will be so (also).  If it is in Cancer, wheat and water will be scarce.  If it is in Leo, wheat, wine and oil will be plentiful, fruit dear, earthquakes, storms at sea and floods.  If in Virgo, the year will be fruitful, the water plentiful, and pregnant women will bear dead children prematurely, and cattle will be cheap.  If in Libra, oil will be scarce, wine plentiful, wheat and walnuts will fail, but the hazel-nuts and the chestnuts will be plentiful.  If it is in Scorpio that it is, many of the bees and silkworms will die, there will be unwholesome air and little silk.  If it be in Sagittarius, wheat, water and birds will be plentiful, but the cattle will not be so.  If it be in Capricornus that the moon will be on the day that Canicula begins, i.e., rises, wheat, wine, oil and every other food and water will be plentiful.  If it be in Aquarius that the moon will be, wheat and water will be scarce; but the worms which are called langosta, i.e., worms which do great damage to the corn, will not be so, and plagues are dangerous that year.  If it be in the sign of Pisces that the moon will be on the day the canicular month begins, wheat, rain and disease will be plentiful, and likewise the wine, but the birds will not be so—sed Deus super omnia.
  6. TABLE OF MANY CITIES AND TOWNS IN SPAIN AND OUT OF IT FOR WHICH THE FOLLOWING TABLE SERVES WHICH TREATS OF NEW AND FULL MOON.
  Cities      Hrs.    Qrs.    Cities.     Hrs.    Qrs.
  C. Valencia   0 0   Zaragoza    0 0
  C. Lerida   0 0   B. Pamplona   0 0—
  C. Valles   0 --    B. Soria    0 0—
  C. Barcelona    0 --    B. Oliete   0 0—
  C. Mallorca   0 1   B. Toledo   0 1
  C. Genova   1 0   B. Almeria    0 1
  C. Milan    1 0   B. Burgos   0 1
  C. Cerdeña    1 0   B. Granada    0 1
  C. Venecia    0 1--   B. Valladolid   0 1—
  C. Roma   0 1--   B. Salamanca    0 2
  C. Napoles    1 1   B. Sevilla    0 1
  C. Florencia    0 1--   B. Cadiz    0 2
  C. Palermo    1 2   B. Lisbon   0 1
  C. Salerno    1   2   B. Gibraltar    0 1
  C. Taranto    1   3   B. Cordova    0 1
  7. ASTROLOGICAL RULES VERY PROFITABLE FOR BLEEDING AND OTHER MEDICAL TREATMENT.
    It is necessary to observe four things in order to let blood, viz., the time, the age, the custom or the habit and the complexion of the person.  In addition to this, Avicenna says that, as regards bleeding, heed should be paid to two occasions, viz., a necessary occasion and an optional occasion, i.e., when the blood is drawn to keep the health, (and the best time for that is warm weather, namely, after sunrise), and to digest the food; nevertheless, even for this the advice of the doctors is good.  The necessary occasion is when a sudden illness comes, and it relieves it to draw blood, as in the case of sharp fever, pleurisy, &c., which brook no delay.  But speaking of the optional occasion, I say with Ptolemy in Centiloquio, Verbo 20, that it is dangerous and ignorant to draw blood from a part over which the moon is ruling.
  8. RULE WHICH SHOWS THE TIME WHEN IT IS GOOD AND BAD TO TAKE A PURGE.
    It is a common and customary rule with learned physicians not to give laxative medicine in the excessive heat of summer or in the great cold of winter, as Hippocrates says in quinto aphorismo, particula 4.: Sub cane et ante canem molesta sunt pharmacia, et medicamentorum usus difficilis.  He also says in lib. de aere, aquis et locis, that it is not good in very changeable weather to give treatment such as cauteries, stretching arms, or any treatment at all, and further, not to do it in the time of the solstices and the equinoxes, and these times and this astrological judgment are so important that Hippocrates said in lib. epidemiae, Hujus modi medicus est qui astrologiam ignorat nemo, &c., i.e., that he is no physician who is ignorant of the science called astrology.  The best time in the year, then, for a purge is the spring for people who are not in need of it.  It is not good to take a purge, or further, to let blood, on the day of new moon, and likewise on the day before that and the day after it.  It is not good, further, to take a purge when the moon is in a sign which is ruminant, namely, Aries, Taurus and Capricornus, because it does not keep it in the stomach without rejecting it; nevertheless, if it be thought good to (purge) by vomiting, that is the best time to take it.  Every time the moon is in a watery sign it is good to take a purge, but if it be a drink it is better that the moon should be in the sign Scorpio: and if it be a bolus that the moon should be in Cancer; and if it be pills that the moon should be in Pisces.  Accordingly, if heed be given to this order the purge will work well and healthily, and there will be good health after it without doubt; and be it noted that these are the watery signs, Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces.
  9. TABLE SHOWING THE BEST TIME FOR PURGING AND BLOODLETTING AND THE BAD TIME.
  Sign      Governs   Purge     Blood       
  Aries     head      bad     good
  Aries     head      bad     good
  Aries     head      bad     good
  Taurus      neck      bad     bad
  Taurus      neck      bad     bad
  Gemini      arms      moderate    bad
  Gemini      arms      moderate    bad
  Cancer      breast      good      moderate
  Cancer      breast      good      moderate
  Leo     heart     bad     bad
  Leo     heart     bad     bad
  Leo     heart     bad     bad
  Virgo     abdomen   bad     bad
  Virgo     abdomen   bad     bad
  Libra     hips      moderate    good
  Libra     hips      moderate    good
  Scorpio   private parts   good      moderate
  Scorpio   private parts   good      moderate
  Scorpio   private parts   good      moderate
  Sagittarius   thighs      moderate    good
  Sagittarius   thighs      moderate    good
  Capricornus   knees     bad     bad
  Capricornus   knees     bad     bad
  Aquarius    shins     moderate    good
  Aquarius    shins     moderate    good
  Pisces      feet      good      moderate
  Pisces      feet      good      moderate
  Pisces      feet      good      moderate
    Since we have shown the dangerous time for letting blood, it is proper here to show the time in which it is good to let it, so that it shall be profitable and wholesome.  In the case of choleric people it is wholesome for them to let blood when the moon is in watery signs, namely, Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces—especially in the last 15 degrees of them.  For phlegmatic people it is good when the moon is in the warm or fiery signs (with the exception of Leo), namely, Aries and Sagittarius.  For melancholic people it is good when the moon is in the airy signs (with the exception of Gemini), namely, Libra and Aquarius.  For sanguinary people, every hour and every sign in which the moon shall be is good, if the rules of medicine and astronomy are kept which we have given already.
  10. ASTRONOMICAL JUDGMENT ON THE NATURAL DISEASES.
    If a sick man wishes to know what the end of his sickness is, let him look how many days have passed since the dog days in the country in which he is until the day his sickness seized him (inclusive), and from that let him subtract the number 36 as many times as it can be subtracted, and let him look up the remainder in the following table, and the letter which is opposite that number will show the end of the sickness, noting that this letter (M) signifies death, and this letter (V) that he will live and [recover from the sickness], and that this letter (L) signifies a long and laborious sickness, and that the number which has not a letter opposite it signifies that it is not known whether he will live or die: and let the careful reader give heed to this rule.
  TABLE.
    1 --- M.    13  --- M.    25  --- M.
    2 --- V.    14  --- V.    26  --- V.
    3 --- L.    15  --- L.    27  --- V.
    4 --- V.    16  --- V.    28  --- M.
    5 --- L.    17  --- V.    29  --- L.
    6 --- M.    18  --- M.    30  --- M.
    7 --- M.    19  --- L.    31  --- L.
    8 --- L.    20  --- V.    32  --- M.
    9 --- V.    21  --- M.    33  --- V.
    10  --- M.    22  ---     34  --- L.
    11  --- V.    23  --- V.    35  --- V.
    12  --- V.    24  --- M.    36. --- V.    
  11. ANOTHER JUDGMENT ON THE SAME THING. 
    The author Guido Aretino says to put the milk of a woman who has born a son in the water of the sick person, and if they stick together it is a certain sign that he will recover from that sickness, but if the contrary happens it is a sign of death.
  12. ANOTHER JUDGMENT.
    The author Bernardus Granullachs in sua Cronographia says to let a drop of the sick man’s blood, shortly after drawing it, fall into a vessel in which there shall be very clean water, and if it sinks without spreading itself through the water it is a sign that he will recover, but if it spreads on the water and remains on the surface it is a sign of death.
  13. A WONDERFUL AND FAMOUS JUDGEMENT ON NATURAL DISEASE ACCORDING TO THE AGE OF THE MOON, WHOSE AUTHOR WAS NICHOLAS FLORENTINUS, A LEARNED AND VERY DISTINGUISHED PHYSICIAN.
  It cannot be denied that the stars and other heavenly bodies work and cause great change in human and terrestrial bodies; and since the moon is the star and planet which does this most, from its being nearer to us and more changeable in itself than the other stars, for that reason Nicholas Florentinus says that, in order that the end of a natural sickness may be known, two things should be noted, i.e., an accurate knowledge of the day one took ill, or in which he felt himself dissatisfied about his sickness, and secondly, certain knowledge of the day of the first appearance of the moon in which he is: then let him consider the days that have passed from the new moon until the day he took sick, and let them be counted (inclusive), and let him look up that number in the following table, and opposite that number will be found out what will be the end of that sickness.  But be it noted that, although the planets effect this change naturally in earthly bodies, God can prevent that, for He is almighty; and in order that this may be understood, I suppose that some one took ill on the sixth day of February, and that the new moon was on the 29th day of January: I count those days inclusive, i.e., putting three days of January with six days of February, and that makes nine days: I look up that number in the table, and I find opposite it a grievous but nor mortal sickness.  With this the whole table will be understood.
  14. TABLE BY WHICH MAY BE KNOWN THE END OF THE NATURAL SICKNESS.
    1. If one takes ill on the day of new moon, he will be in danger until the 14th, 21st and
      28th day, but after that it signifies health.
    2. Here, it signifies danger before the 14th day; after that he will be better.
    3. Here, a short but not troublesome sickness.
    4. Here, a very dangerous sickness until the twenty-first day, but if he recovers from that he will be well.
    5. Here, a troublesome but not mortal sickness.
    6. Here, it signifies that, unless he is well shortly, he will have a troublesome sickness, but on the fifth day of the moon he will be well.
    7. Here, he will be well shortly.
    8. Here, unless he be well in 12 or 14 days, he will be in danger.
    9. Here, a grievous but not mortal sickness.
    10. Here, danger before the 15th day.
    11. Here, death or life shortly.
    12. Here, unless he is well before the 15th day, he will die.
    13. Here, a very troublesome sickness until the 18th day and if he recovers from that, he will be well.
    14. Here, he will be sick 15 days, but after that he will improve.
    15. Here, unless he is well by four days, he will be in danger of death, or as another author says, he will go to the door of death.
    16. Here, he will be sick until the 18th day, and if he recovers from that he will be well.
    17. Here, if he goes beyond the 18th day, he will be well.
    18. Here, unless he is well shortly, he will be a long time sick and in danger.
    19. Here, he will be well shortly, if he gets good regimen.
    20. Here, he will be in danger until the 6th or 7th day, and if he recovers from that, he will be well.
    21. Here, unless he dies within 10 days, he will be well with the new moon.
    22. Here, within 10 or 12 days he will be well.
    23. Here, he will be well the next month at latest.
    24. Here, unless he is well in 22 days, or by the new moon of the next month, he will be in danger.
    25. Here, unless he dies within six days, he will be well, nevertheless with difficulty.
    26. Here, a grievous dangerous sickness.
    27. Here, he will fall from that sickness into another sickness.
    28. Here, danger before the 21st day.
    29. Here, he will gradually get better slowly.
    30. Here, a troublesome sickness, but with good attendance he will be well shortly.
  15. PROFITABLE AND CHRISTIAN ADVICE FIT TO BE TAKEN.
    Every time things which are stolen, or lost, or go astray, cannot be discovered naturally by the virtues of the stars, and further, when a sickness is hurtful so that it is not known what its end may be, it is a good thing to put the matter before God and His saints; because God has given power to them to counteract natural working, and to show things which are lost or stolen, and such like; as has often been shown through the intercession of the famous saint, Antony of Padua, of the Order of S. Francis, to every good Christian who has prayed to Him earnestly and with good faith, with the Responsorium, and with this collect which the whole Church uses, viz., Si quaeris miracula, mors, error, calamitas, daemon lepra fugiunt, aegri surgunt sani, &c.  Ora pro nobis B. Antonni, ut digni &c.  Oremus:  Ecclesiam tuam Deus B. Antonii &c.  And I say the truth to the glory of God and in honor of the saint, that it has often happened to myself to find things which were lost, through the virtue of that devotion.  And let every person who hears me believe, for in case that the things which are lost are not found immediately, nevertheless let him have firm hope that they will be found, if it be expedient for him.  Accordingly let no one leave off saying it frequently.  I said, if it be expedient for him; for although we know the things we ask, still we do not know if it is good for us to get them; but it is certain that God knows best the things which are expedient for us; accordingly, at times, the things which we ask, [and which appear to us to be good], God does not give to us, because they are bad for our souls; although we think that they are good for our bodies, for it is to that we mostly look.  This is evident from what happened to a lady in the city of Valencia who suffered painfully a long time from a disease called cancer.  She made a devotion of nine days to the blessed saint San Luis Beltran, of the Order of S. Dominic, that she might get her health from God.  At the end of the nine days she was whole.  After that she heard from a preacher that an important way to secure eternal glory was to be under labor, hardship and pains in this world for God’s sake.  Accordingly she began to make the same devotion to the same saint, praying him, if that would be an occasion to get glory, to send her the same disease again.  She got her request, and in a short time she went to possess glory.  But let us return to our conversation.  It is not only that this Responsorium of S. Antony serves to get back things which are lost or stolen, but in addition, it helps to save a man from misery and poverty.  it is, further, mighty against the Devil, saves one from wandering of way or mind, from death, leprosy and other diseases, from necessities and from many evils.  through this Responsorium victory is given over winds and storms by sea and land, and further, the limbs of people who are crippled from disease are loosed miraculously.  Give heed to this wonder, which is unusual, viz., that the Church gives permission to every man to ask miracles of God through this Responsorium, as the first three words say, saying Si quaeris miracula.  We have purposely treated of it so that anyone who shall lose or have things stolen from him, may not offer to trouble the astronomers to give them knowledge, or to erect a figure by their art to show that; because they are unprofitable; and, further, it is a cause of suspicions, contentions, evil reputation, as the astronomers admit themselves, and as experience proves for us, I myself also being a witness to that.
  THE EIGHTH CHAPTER.
  1. CONCERNING OTHER WONDERS OF THE MOON, AS REGARDS THE SIGNS AND FIRST THUNDER OF THE YEAR.
    If the first thunder of the year happens when the moon is in the sign Aries, the herbs and grass will be plentiful.  If it is in Taurus the moon is at the first thunder, the hills will be more fruitful than the lowlands, and the dry ground better than the wet ground, and the sheep and the wine will be plentiful.  If it is in Gemini the moon is at that time, bread and water and hail and peas will be plentiful, but the birds will not be so.  If it is in Cancer it is, there will be famine and commotion in the villages under the dominion of that sign, and worms will do damage to the corn and the fruit in the lowlands, and water will be plentiful.  If it is in Leo, there will be strife between kings, living will be dear, and important personages will die that year.  If it is in Virgo, enemies and spies will be plentiful, and many of the large cattle will die.  If it is in Libra, the beginning of the year will be dry, and its end wet, and food will be dear.  If it is in Scorpio, wine will be plentiful, many of the fish and sheep will die, and the women will lose children dead before their birth, and powerful and mighty winds will not be lacking that year.  If it is in Sagittarius it is, water will be moderate and profitable, fruit scarce, divisions plentiful between the people of one house and one village.  If it is in Capricorn the moon is, the people will be melancholy, and there will be plagues in the countries which are under the dominion of that sign.  If it is in Aquarius it is, the water will be plentiful, there will be trouble and terror in the villages, and evil unhealthy winds.  If it is in Pisces the moon is at the first thunder of the year, the weather will be very dry, and there will be great frost in its own time, wine will be plentiful, fruit scarce, and sickness harmless.  Be it noted that it is in the countries which are under the dominion of the sign in which the moon is at the first thunder that these things will happen more especially.
  2. INSTRUCTION PROFITABLE TO WORKING PEOPLE.
    That the husbandman may have full fruit as regards his labor, let him take care to sow the seed and the spores at the crescent of the moon, and when it is in the sign of Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Libra and Capricorn, and he will see wonderful fruit by reason of that.
  3. CURIOUS SECRET RECOMMENDED TO WORKING PEOPLE.
    That is may be known from year to year which of the grains will be most plentiful and profitable . . . . a certain author writes, as Samoranus says in his book . . asking to sow three or four grains of each kind of grain, in a good and wet ground, a month before the dog days, and the grain which shows itself best on the first day of the dog days, that is the best to sow, and will be most plentiful the coming year; and the grain which shows itself worst and grows most withered on the same day, will have least fruit that year.