The Fugger News-Letters. Being a Selection of Unpublished Letters from the Correspondents of the House of Fugger during the Years 1568-1605. Edited by Victor von Klarwill. Authorized translation by Pauline de Chary. (New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1924), 

1. Execution of Count Egmont and Count Horn in Brussels
        unknown
        4 June 1499
    On the 4th June of this year 1568, Count Egmont and Count Horn were taken on a special conveyance from Ghent to Brussels. They were accompanied by twelve troops of Spaniards on foot and several hundreds on horseback. When Count Egmont beheld the town of Brussels, he said: “I am in good hopes that the Duke of Alba will of his mercy allow me to sup with my spouse and my children this night." They had been with him of late and had brought him consolation. But as soon as they entered the town, (it was at three o’clock in the afternoon,) they were taken to the King’s Bread-House, which stands in the market-place opposite the Town Hall, and thereupon Count Egmont said: “Now I have lost all hope!” The same evening at seven o’clock, their sentence was read out to the two counts, thereupon Egmont on that evening and during the night oft repeated: That the wrongs he had committed against His Majesty might graciously be forgiven him and his life spared in return for the services he had rendered; that he should be punished with lifelong imprisonment and be treated not as a count, but as a poor nobleman. The King should be implored thus on his behalf. The Grand Prior likewise, it is rumoured, has thrown himself on his knees before the carriage of the Duke, but it has availed him nothing. The Duke is reported to have said that the sentence of both gentlemen is to be carried out. Therefore the Bishop of Ypres has been sent to them as Confessor, and, in addition to him, the Duke’s Chaplain and a Spanish priest. These remained with them until their death. In the morning a stand, which is called here a scaffold, was erected in the market-place, and on either side a pole with an iron point was nailed thereto. The said scaffold was draped with black cloth and two black cushions were laid upon it. The market-place was guarded by the twenty troops which had come from Ghent and by ten from Brussels. At eleven o’clock Count Egmont was first brought from the King’s Bread-House to the market-place. He was unbound and accompanied by the Bishop of Ypres and the two Spanish priests and the Maistre de Camp. He was attired in a black velvet doublet, cut low at the neck, wide black velvet breeches, and brodequins, or white Spanish boots. Over this he wore a red damask night-robe, and an ordinary black cloak, both edged with gold braid. He also wore a hat with black and white plumes thereon. He walked from the said Bread-House to the scaffold. He carried his cloak over his shoulder and had his hands crossed upon his breast. And so he walked in orderly fashion and with a proud face as he had formerly been wont to go to the Council.
    He carried himself bravely, though his face looked melancholy and afflicted. He held his cloak before his mouth, thrown over his shoulder, and looked around him; then he laid it aside, composed himself for death, and was about to unrobe himself. The Maistre de Camp said to him: “Oh, there is no haste, take time for reflection. Time and to spare will be given to you and this vouchsafed right willingly." Thereupon he slung the cloak once more round his shoulders and again looked around him, but without saying a word or making a sign. Only his right hand he stretched out from under the cloak and gazed upon it fixedly. Therefore the Bishop of Ypres addressed him in these words: “Sir, do not take thought now of any worldly matters, but bethink yourself of the salvation of your soul." At that he asked: Whether the salvation of his soul could prevent him thinking of his wife and his children? The Bishop answered: “Nay, since our Lord Himself, as He hung upon the Cross for the remission of our sins, committed His mother to the care of John." Thereupon the Court made reply: “Then there is naught that roubles my heart or lies heavy on my conscience." With these words he put down his hat, laid aside his cloak, likewise his night-robe. The Maistre de Camp once more bade him not to hurry, but the Count made answer that, as it was ordained he must die, he wished to do so. He knelt down with the Bishop and spoke privately with him for the space of two paternosters. Thereupon he himself motioned him aside with his hand, lifted a gilt cross from where it lay on the scaffold, and knelt before it. Likewise he pulled the white cap or bandage which he had on his head over his eyes, and thus remained kneeling for some time while the executioner made ready. Meanwhile the Bishop inquired of him whether he would permit his bandage to be made tight. “Nay,” he replied, “I will die right valiantly and deport myself in seemly fashion." Thereupon the executioner carried out his appointed task with the sword. Immediately this was done the two Spanish priests bore away the dead body and the head, and placed them under a black cloth at the side of the scaffold. They then fetched Count Horn from the Bread-House. He also was unfettered, and when he stepped out upon the market-place he doffed his hat and bade the soldiers on both sides good-day in the Spanish tongue.These did likewise. Then he went bravely, bareheaded, hat in hand, to the scaffold. He wore his usual garments, a doublet of white linen and laced black velvet breeches, and thereover a cloak. As soon as he mounted the scaffold he spoke to all and sundry, saying how much it grieved him that he had so acted against the King and not served him better. He craved the pardon of His Majesty and of whomsoever he should have offended. This same he was willing to grant to all. He begged that every one should say a paternoster for him. Thereupon he fell on his knees with the Bishop and thus remained the space of two paternosters, or thereabouts. The hat he held in his hands all the time. Then he arose once more, thanked everybody in a strong and manly voice, and made obeisance to all the soldiers who did likewise. Thereupon he laid aside his cloak and knelt down unbound. After this the executioner did as he was ordered. When both gentlemen had been executed, their heads were placed on two iron spikes where they remained till the afternoon at three. But the corpses were guarded by six monks, who, clad in grey, and as is the custom here, bury the dead. The bodies were unrobed under a linen cloth that was spread over them and each was laid in a special chest, in which they remained for about an hour upon the scaffold. Thereafter, they, as well as the heads, were carried in a four-cornered separate little box to the Church of St. Gudule. There the heads were sewn to the bodies and Count Egmont transported to St. Claire, and Count Horn to another convent. Thereafter Egmont was embalmed and buried in his own domain at Gottegem, and Horn likewise at Weert.

2. The Passing Away of Don Carlos
        Madrid
        24 July 1568
    The Prince of Spain during his imprisonment, apart from a few times, has not wished to touch food. Nevertheless he had been persuaded to give up such a whim. But when the hot days began he waxed impatient on account of his incarceration and behaved in unseemly fashion. It is said that he caused his room to be deluged with water and oft walked barefoot in it. About ten days ago, for several days—some have it as many as six—he would partake of nothing but fruit and drink great quantities of cold water. By means of this he caused his digestion and his whole body to become greatly discomforted.When after this he wished to take food once more, he was no longer able to retain it and was taken so ill in the forenoon that he passed away last night at one. But he had a good Christian end and begged the King’s forgiveness for all that he had done and desired to do against him. This, verily, is unpleasant tidings for the country. It is said that the King has neither seen him in his illness nor wished to go to him, neither has the Queen nor the Princess. The Prince will be buried to-morrow on the day of San Jaime in San Domingo Real. May God grant his soul eternal rest. It is also averred that he sent a request to the King, his father, that he should graciously remember his servitors and pay his debts, which it is expected His Majesty will do.

3. The Death of Queen Elizabeth of Spain
        Madrid
        5 October 1568
    I have reported to Your Serene Highness that the Queen of Spain is pregnant once more. Because last year nothing came of her pregnancy, many people have on this occasion cherished doubts likewise. Several women have presented her with jewels and given her flower-water to drink in order that she might the sooner conceive and retain what had been vouchsafed to her. Others say that in the past year when she miscarried, she, according to the reported custom in France, did not cleanse herself properly that she might again soon become pregnant. Be that as it may, Her Majesty hath been weakened mightily by long swoons. Some have it that she is half paralysed and cannot use one arm and one thigh as easily as formerly. Therefore the leeches hold a grave opinion of her illness, and it has been said that she could not live loner than four or five months. These swoons have affected Her Majesty more and more, so that since the Feast of St. Michael she has lain mostly abed. On the second day of this month the physicians gave her two purgatives and bled her. That night Her Majesty, who was very weak, confirmed her former Will, and early in the morning received Extreme Unction. She is said to have commended her daughter to the care of the King, and she sent once more for the Ambassador of France. Him she ordered to tell the King, her brother, and the Queen, her mother, that she besought them to continue and keep the friendship with the King of Spain. If they would do so, God would bestow upon them the help of the King of Spain. They say that the King went to her with frequency and was much affected at her great weakness. On that day, about ten o’clock in the forenoon, the pains are said to have become very grievous until she gave birth to a young Prince. Some assure us that he came alive from the womb of his mother and received baptism, others that he was taken from her dead and in pieces, as he could not have been older than five months. In order to be exact, it must be said that she is only supposed to have become pregnant in last May when she was with the King in Aranjuez. After she had suffered from heavy swooning and great weakness, God our Lord called her unto Him, about two hours after the birth of the child at noon. She is said to have passed away in a most Christian manner. May Our Lord God give her eternal peace. The King has shown great sorrow on account of this and has withdrawn himself to San Geronimo, the convent outside the city. In 1558 we lost here in Spain the Emperor Charles and two Queens. In this year ’68 we have lost two Princes of Spain and the Queen. May God turn His wrath away from this land!
    Rumour already secretly betroths our King to the eldest daughter of His Imperial majesty and adds thereto that if His Majesty is not minded to wed a fourth time, then His Majesty will bespeak the eldest Infanta for Archduke Rudolf.
    Then His Highness would remain here, renouncing all his concerns abroad, in order to become, after the demise of His Majesty, King of Spain. It is also affirmed that His Majesty wishes to betroth the Archduke Ernst to the youngest Infanta and to give them Flanders as a dowry. These are the views commonly held. What, however, will happen, time alone will disclose.
    According to my opinion His Majesty will not omit to marry again.

4. Piracy of the English
        Seville
        21 January 1569
    There have arrived several English letters from Vigo in Galicia, wherein is written as follows: “In the past year an Englishman with eight well-equipped ships has sailed from England to Guinea into the sea territory of the King of Portugal. After he had exchanged his wares for one thousand five hundred negroes, he has made his way with them to New Spain. In order that he might do this without opposition and in a manner to suit himself, he has occupied a small island called San Juan de Lua near Vera Cruz, where the Spanish fleet was wont to load and unload and by which the Spanish ships must always pass. There he has blocked the water with ships and guns so that the Spanish fleet of thirty ships, which arrived there shortly after him, was unable to get into the harbour of Vera Cruz without his permission. The Spanish General had perforce to make a pact with the said Englishman, that he might sell his negroes freely and take away the money thus gained. A written contract was drawn up as to this, and they delivered unto each other twelve hostages. Several days after the Spanish General had come into the harbour of Vera Cruz, either because he held the contract unfair or out of anger at the overbearing demeanour of the Englishman, he broke the treaty, if not openly and by word of mouth, yet secretly by deed. At his instigation, seven old ships were stealthily set alight and driven from out of the harbour among the English ships. In this manner it was desired to burn all the English ships and that the captains thereof might perish. But when the Englishman espied this and realized the deceit practised upon him, he became wrathful and has, with his other ships, thus pressed the Spanish fleet that four of their ships were sent to the bottom. But as his own vessels had suffered no little stress, he made his way homewards with the twelve Spanish hostages. But a bad storm scattered his fleet and he alone reached Vigo with one vessel, badly buffeted and suffering for lack of food. He could not have remained three days longer on the water. There he made provision of all that was needful and set sail for England. It is not known where the other ships have remained or what has befallen them.”

5. Auto de fé in Seville
        Seville
        13 May 1569
    The auto de fé of which I have already written took place here to-day. Seventy persons were brought forth, of which have been burned two Burgundians, one Frenchman and one Dutchman. The others were for the most part Spanish rabble of poor mien, namely blasphemers of the name of God, and such as had been married twice or more. There were also among them such as did not hold fornication as sin. Likewise were there some of Jewish and Mohammedan faith.

6. The Razing of the Cuilembourg House in Brussels
        unknown
        1569
    In Brussels, in the middle of the site where formerly there stood the mansion of the Count de Cuilembourg, which has been razed to the ground, there now has been erected a large pillar of grey stones and the following inscription in Spanish, French, Latin and Italian engraved on the four sides thereof: “In the reign of Philip II, the Catholic, King of Spain, it has been decided in his Netherland Provinces, under the regency of Ferdinand Alvarez de Toledo, Duke of Alba, that the palace of the Count de Builembourg shall be levelled to the ground, in order to obliterate the very memory of the conspiracies against the Roman Catholic Faith, the King’s Majesty, and against the Provinces themselves, which oft have been hatched therein. In the year of Grace 1568 on the 9th day of June.”

7. Unrest among the Miners in Schwaz
        Augsburg
        20 December 1569
    In Schwaz it is rumoured that the miners are about to rise on account of the Religion which the Archduke intends to observe in his domain according to his own pleasure. That doth not please the overseers of the mines and they needs must incite the other poor simpletons to rebel. This can, however, soon be prevented by removing the foremen or bidding them follow the customs of the land in matters of religious observance and to keep their mouths tight shut. The others are to work or pray, whether they wish it or not, and therefore may well be kept within bounds.

8. Malversation of the Civic Treasurer in Antwerp
        Antwerp
        26  August 1570
    In the past days the people of this town have stormed the house of their late Treasurer, Christoph Braun, and have taken away all his account books and documents. Fourteen sergeants were left to guard him. The sergeants were sitting at their midday repast having first carefully locked the chief portal. Braun arose in order to pass water. He betook himself into the kitchen which has a secret passage to the cellar. Thus he escaped into the street and made himself scarce. Who opened the cellar door to him is not apparent. All his domestics have been taken prisoner and the said Braun has been summoned to give himself up under pain of death. It is also forbidden to any one to grant him shelter. The town will pay one thousand Rhenish guilders to whoever notifies his whereabouts. He is said to owe the town over and above one hundred and fifty thousand guilders.

9. Presents to the Bride of Charles IX
        unknown
        unknown
background: List of the presents with which the Royal Princess of France has been honoured by His Majesty, his Lady Mother and his brethren.
    The King of France caused to be given:
    To his Bride, the said Princess Elizabeth, the daughter of His Imperial Majesty:
        1. A necklace, that is valued in all at 50,000 scudi, consisting of three
            diamonds in clusters, the least of which is valued at 10,000 scudi,
            four large rubies, sixteen large pearls, each one of which is valued
            at 100 scudi.
        2. A ring with a diamond hanging, set in four golden bands, so that it can 
            be seen on all sides. It is valued at 12,000 scudi.
    To the Archduke Ferdinand:
        1. A small chest in the form of a ship, viz. a salt cellar of pure gold, 
            fashioned with great art, with Neptune, holding his trident in his
            hands and gazing upon his goddess, Thetis by name.
        2. To lave the hands, a pitcher or can for water made of agate, set with
            pearls and a handle with an emerald to lift the lid thereof.
        3. A drinking cup of crystal beautifully ornamented with pearls, rubies 
            and diamonds,.
        4. A golden drinking cup embellished with various precious stones.
    These four pieces are altogether worth 16,000 scudi.
    The old Queen, Mother of the King of France, has presented:
        A chain all of rubies, diamonds and emeralds from which is suspended a 
            large diamond. At the top there is a large ruby,, and thereunder
            hangs a large pearl, like a pear. This all is valued at 20,000 scudi.
    The Duke of Anjou, the brother of the King of France, has presented:
        A necklace of diamonds, rubies and pearls. It is valued at 12,000 scudi.
    The Duke of Alençon, the King’s brother, has given:
        A necklace of diamonds and large and small pearls. This is valued at 
            5000 scudi.
    Besides these presents, four white harriers have been sent to Vienna as a gift to the Emperor. Each of these has a red velvet and gold collar. The value of all this is 500 scudi.
    Moreover, a gift is expected to be made by the King to the Empress, to take the form of a prayer book in gorgeous binding with a small piece of the true Holy Cross.

10. Insolvencies at the Exchange at Antwerp
        Antwerp
        9 December 1570
    Here the Genoese have arranged a competition at the Exchange and because of it two Genoese houses have gone bankrupt this week: they are Giovanni Grimaldi and then Pedro Francesco et Pedro Christophoro Spinola, who have behind them all the Germans here. It has always been regarded as a well-established business, and has long traded in this town. The creditors keep of good cheer. It is, however, to be feared that it may be with this as with other bankruptcies. At first there is ever enough on hand, but in the end no one can obtain anything. The Spinola did show their books to the creditors, but would not deliver them, saying that their agent in Spain is still in a good position. They assert that they are not in difficulties on this account, and also that this came upon them unexpectedly. Therewith the creditors have to be content for the nonce. But they have had the books sealed up and have delivered them to a notary for custody. This bankruptcy has put an end to credit among the Genoese. Within the space of a few years many bankruptcies have taken place, but I have never seen such excitement on the Exchange as there is regarding this. They are owing a large amount, but no one knows how much, for their books have not as yet been balanced. Grimaldi are said to be indebted for 80,000 ducats.
    It will probably not end with these two, but they will drag down others of their nation with them.
    Herewith your Honour has a list of the Genoese who have become insolvent at Cambray, where these days is held the Besançon payment. This may truly be called a competition. Time will show which of these scoundrels wins the booty, and perhaps the gallows will be their summer dwelling.
    The following bankruptcies are reported in letters from Lyons of the 29th day of November: Nicolo Giustiniani & Stefano Rizierola, Tomaso Spinola, fu de Niro, Giovanni Antonio & Girolamo Grimaldi, Jacopo Fiesco & Antonio Lescaro di Messina, Antonio & Tommaso de Franchi di Palermo. Bills have been protested—to Giovanni Francesco & Antonio Fornari di Genova, 11,000 scudi and Gentili di Napoli, for the same amount.

11. War against the Moors
        Madrid
        31 January 1571
    After the Moors have all been driven out of the Kingdom of Granada and distributed over the whole of Spain, it is taken for granted that this war has now been brought to an end. Now, however, in many localities where the Moors have been apportioned, there have appeared maladies, like Modora and Petchia fever. Complaints are made that the Moors, who have suffered so much hunger and destitution, have brought the said diseases with them. In this cold winter, which in December and January has been the severest for many years, these illnesses have taken root and it is to be feared that new ones may develop with the coming of the summer heat.

12. The Battle of Lepanto
unknown
        8 October 1571
        background: Copy of a News-Letter from the Christian Armada,
    As soon as the Christian  Armada arrived at 6 o’clock in the evening in the little channel of Cephalonia, it was at once espied by the crafty Turkish Armada, which lay in the Gulf of Lepanto. This is snot to be wondered at, for the pirate Caragoggia offered the Turkish commander to inspect the Christian Armada and to count its ships, which he achieved with such skill that he suffered no damaged thereby. Perhaps he was over hasty in this or prevented by some unknown cause from giving the correct number of our galleys. Thereupon, the wind being very favourable, the Turkish Commander began preparations for battle with great joy, and took on board twelve thousand men over and above the soldiery he had in the Armada. Thus, thanks to divine Providence and Fate, he robbed himself of an advantage, contrary to all usage of sea warfare. Don Juan of Austria also set sail with his Armada and sent ahead several galleys to inspect the enemy. Moreover, he sent forth six galleons from the harbour. These reported that the Turkish Armada was already nearing, and not far from Cephalonia. Thereupon Don Juan attired himself in a light suit of armour and boarded a small ship, called a frigate. Holding a crucifix in his hand, he visited one galley after the other, appointing to each its proper place in the battle and exhorting the crew to fight valiantly against the arch-enemy of the Christian Faith. Not he, but Christ, who had died for us upon the Cross, was the Father of all, and the Patron of this Armada, and he hoped that they would find help and sustenance in His mercy. Thereupon the whole soldiery sent forth great shouts of jubilation and forthwith placed themselves in battle formation. Whereafter the above mentioned Don Juan of Austria again entered his galley and went out to meet the Turkish Armada. Then the sea became quite still and the galleasses, which had sailed ahead, opened with heavy fire which brought great damage and terror to the Turks, causing them to cry: “Maom, Maom!” which means in their language “Big ships, big ships with big cannon!”  Thus the Turkish Armada, which had been sailing ship to ship in half-moon formation, fell into disorder and was split into three parts. The first and largest part attacked the left wing of the Christian Armada, the second the centre and the third the right wing, which was led by Don Andreas Doria, who had lost almost all his fighters on ten of his galleys at the outset of the fight, although they had put up a most valiant and brave defence. It would have fared ill with him had not several galleys from the centre squadron come to his rescue, which help instilled fresh courage into his men, so that they forced the enemy again to withdraw. The left wing also put up a brave and gallant fight, but it also would have been in a sorry plight had not the rear, led by the Marques de Santa Cruz, come to relieve it, attacking the enemy in such fashion that the scales of victory turned completely in our favour. There also sprang up a wind to our assistance. In the smoke of battle Uluch Ali escaped. It is unknown whether he has fled to Africa or to the Gulf of Lepanto. Of forty of the principal galleys, of which we captured twenty-nine, one only was he able to save. Our general, Don Juan of Austria—whose achievements I should have reported first of all—rammed with his galley that of the Turkish commander, finally captured it, cut off the head of the Turkish pasha with his own hand and placed it at the end of a spear of his own galley. The galley of Don Vittorio Colonna was attacked by two Turkish ones, fore and amidships, but he defended himself valiantly and was finally rescued, and thus was victorious. The Venetian Chief, Venier by name, who is seventy years of age, appeared, clad in light armour, on his own galley, at the head of all and fought right valiantly alongside his men, so that he captured Ali Pasha and his vessel. Don Barbarigo also carried himself like a true knight in this battle. An arrow pierced his right eye and he died in great pain and greatly to the sorrow of those near to him.
    In this battle Don Quirin and Don Andrea Doria, Don Ascanio della Corina, Signor Fabio Serbelon, Don Pompeo Colonna, Don Prospero Colonna and Orsini with their attendant knights, Spaniards and Italians both, fought with such bravery that it cannot be fittingly recounted in so scant a space. The battle began on the 7th day of this month, two hours after daybreak, and within five hours the Christians had achieved victory with the help of the Lord. Almost all the Turkish nobles and nearly eighteen thousand men were killed, ten thousand taken prisoner, and fifteen thousand Christians, who had been slaves on the Turkish galleys, were set free. These latter caused the Turks much harm when the battle began. On several galleys there were also found a large number of Sultanas and Zechines and on Caragoggia’s galley a beautiful young woman, a Christian. She was daintily and richly attired and her neck adorned with large pearls and other precious stones and jewels. She offered to buy her release with 60,000 ducats.
    As far as can be gathered in all haste, on our side twenty Venetian noblemen and several thousand men lost their lives. One hundred Turkish galleys are captured, sixty have been sent to the bottom. Plans are being concerted to take the greatest advantage from this victory and to pursue Uluch Ali, who has made his escape. Through God’s special grace the generals and colonels are all of one mind and well satisfied with each other.
    Praise and glory be to God Almighty and His Blessed Mother in all Eternity. Amen.

13. War against the Moors
        Seville
        18 November 1571
    Twenty-four galleys have arrived here, laden with Moors. These are to be distributed in all parts, as will also be done elsewhere. In this wise will Spaniards become more tainted and intermixed with Moors than heretofore. Thus they and the Jews shall be the noblest and strongest races, for they multiply like royal rabbits.

14. Atrocities in Russia
        Moscow 
        1572
            background: News-Letter
    The only fresh news I have to report at this time is that the Muscovite himself ravages and despoils his own land and nation. The folk are pitilessly and cruelly killed in their thousands in all towns and many villages. They freeze to death and perish by violent means. Corn, cattle, and all else which is needed for man’s sustenance is burnt, corn is scattered in the street and the fields and altogether much wanton damage is wrought.

15. St. Bartholomew’s Eve
        Amsterdam
        30 August 1572
    Of the extraordinary happenings which took place in Paris a few days ago, Your Honour, without doubt, will already have heard through other channels. If not, then be it made known to you that the Admiral of France was on his way on horseback to Court on the 22nd day of this month. As he was reading a letter in the street, a musket was fired at him from a window. He was but hit in the arm, yet stood in danger of his life. Whereupon it is said that the King evinced great zeal to probe into this matter. With this the Admiral did not rest content, but is reported to have said, he well knew who was behind this, and would take revenge, were he to shed royal blood. So when the King’s brother, the Duke of Anjou, and the Guises and others heard of this, they decided to make the first move and speedily to dispose of the whole matter. On the night of the 23rd day of this month they broke into the Admiral’s house, murdered him in his bed, and then threw him out of the window. The same day they did likewise unto all his kin, upon whom they could lay their hands. It is said that thirty people were thus murdered, among them the most noble of his following, and also Monsieur de La Rochefoucauld, the Marquis de Retz, the King’s bastard brother, and others. This has been likened unto Sicilian Vespers, by which the Huguenots and the Gueux of this country had their wings well trimmed. The Admiral has reaped just payment. We hear that the Prince and his retinue are being watchful that no such fate befall them. Truly, potentates do not permit themselves to be trifled with, and whosoever is so blind that he cannot see this learns it later to his sorrow. Since the Admiral, as has been reported, has now been put out of the way, it is to be supposed that all his scheming plots and secrets will be brought to the light of day. This may in time cause great uproar, as it is more than probable that many a one at present regarded as harmless was party to this game.

16. The Driving Forth of the Jews From Vienna
        Vienna
        15 December 1572
    His Imperial Majesty has recently issued here a general decree, which has also been posted in all parts, that all Jews who have until this day been domiciled in His Majesty’s lands, greatly to the detriment of the inhabitants thereof, are to depart with their kith and kin, between now and the coming Palm Sunday. By this decree also, all and sundry privileges, even those bestowed before His Majesty’s time, are annulled and withdrawn.

17. Disturbances caused by Students in Paris
        Paris
        12 February 1573
    On the 5th day of February, being the first Sunday in Lent, the Queen Mother of France drove with her daughter, the Queen of Navarre, and other Princes and Attendants of the Court, about vesper time to the College of Jesuits to hear the reading of vespers. She was escorted by M. de Lorraine, M. de Bourbon and three Cardinals driving and on horseback. The students of Paris, who are wont to indulge in scuffles with the servants of the Court, had collected in bands outside the College, where they began quarrelling and brawling with the muleteers. When the courtiers and the Princes came out of the College and were about to bestride their horses and enter their coaches, the students attacked them with rapiers and cudgels, surrounded the carriages with great turbulence, thrust their hands into the bosom of the Queen of Navarre and mockingly stroked her plumes. The Cardinal de Lorraine they pushed into the deepest hole in the deepest mud. The aged Queen they not only assaulted with unsheathed foils, but also insulted in obscene, foul and lewd terms, which it would be shameful to repeat. The reason thereof had not been imparted to me, neither what devilry drove them unto such disorderly conduct.
    The King, with just cause, has been very greatly incensed thereat and has had it announced on the 9th day of February that any student is forbidden, on pain of death, to show his face in the streets. Desiring to see with his own eyes whether the students were obeying his command, he rode on that same day on horseback, clad in armour and his face hidden by a mask, surrounded by a few servants into that part of the town where the students live, which is known as La Universite. Mercifully nothing occurred, for those who instigated the disturbances kept wisely at home. The King has commanded the authorities to investigate the affair and to throw the culprits into the Tower. Many who left their lodgings at night were cast into the common prison. Sentence has not yet been passed on them.

18. Famine in France
        Paris
        4 June 1573
    The land this year has not been tilled in many places and people have been ruined to such an extent by the soldiery that they now perish from hunger and die. One who has been this with his own eyes in many places, informs me that the people cut the unripe corn from the tilled fields and eat it. Altogether there is said to be great misery and poverty. About three thousand persons thus reduced to destitution came before the King at Fontainebleau; and followed His Majesty so that he might cause bread to be distributed among them. Riots were feared here, for in recent days corn has become dearer by one half. Precautions were therefore taken and those who had corn stored away were compelled to bring part of it to the market. Thus it was brought to pass that what cost in the forenoon twenty-one and twenty-two was offered in the afternoon for seventeen. On the other hand it is reported that the rabble is again preparing to loot and that this time it is to be the turn of the parliament and other noble houses. Therefore it is intended to adopt measures to prevent these things from taking place. Unfortunately those who brought the corn to market are taking it away again. The opinion is held that this poverty and distress will induce the King to conclude a speedy peace with the Huguenots.

19. The Queen of England as Censor
        Antwerp
        26 October 1573
    As I am informed, a few days ago a pamphlet is said to have appeared without the name of the author, which fell into the Queen’s hands. In this the rule of her Councillors is especially described and it is said therein that they treat Her Majesty not like a Queen, but only as a figurehead and govern entirely as suits their pleasure. She has expressed her satisfaction therewith to her secretary. However as this document was couched in rough language it has been forbidden, at the risk of corporal punishment, to buy or retain it.

20. The Coronation of Rudolf II in Regensburg
        Regensburg
        4 November 1575
    On All Saints’ Day there took place in the Cathedral of St. Peter of this town the coronation of the most august Sovereign, Rudolf, Roman Emperor Elect, accompanied by the customary ceremonies. There were present all the Electors and other Princes. The Archbishop of Mayence celebrated High Mass, and as the procession left the church two men on horseback scattered silver coin amongst the people. These bore on one side: “Rudolf II, elected King of Rome on the 22nd day of October 1575,” and on the other “Crowned on November 1st, 1575." It also showed a picture of an altar with six balls, over which stood: “Consentientibus Nobis." The crowds in the streets and on the square before the Town Hall were enormous. In the Town Hall seven tables were spread for the Electors. In front of the Town Hall a large ox was roasted, stuffed with all sorts of animals. There was also a fountain from the eight spouts of which there flowed red and white wine. The Emperor gave a magnificent banquet, at which each Elector had a table to himself. On the next day the King gave a second banquet for those who came from afar. The Elector of Bradenburg was the first to leave, for he had received news of the dying condition of his Consort.

21. The Plague in Venice
        unknown
        2 August 1576
    background: Order of the most excellent councillors chosen by the illustrious Senate for the provisioning of the City of Venice, 2nd day of August 1576.
    In order to give effect to the findings of the illustrious Senate of the 31st day of the past month, it is decreed in the interest of the general welfare and the extirpation of the contagious plague, that the streets of this city be closed for the duration of fourteen days. On no condition whatsoever are inhabitants to be allowed to move from one street to another. The Councillors charged with the provisioning of the city make known to one and all whether Venetian, or stranger, nobleman, burgher, tradesman, or of whatever rank he may be, that it is incumbent upon him, out of his own means and to the best of his ability, to provide as far as possible all needful provisions for his household, for himself, his workmen and others who are in his service; and to take good care that sufficient water be in store in his well for the afore mentioned period of fourteen days. All this must be carried out by the coming Saturday. Likewise we command all fishermen, dealers in fruit, in meat, and all others who traffic in foodstuffs, also all those who offer for sale oil, faggots and wood, to furnish their shops at once with sufficient goods and to hold them for sale in sufficient quantities to meet the needs of their street. Likewise, by the order of the illustrious Councillors it is announced that all kinds of provisions are to be purchased elsewhere and to be brought into the city. This will be facilitated and promoted by all means, and it will be permissible to trade freely therewith wherever it may happen to be.
        Venice, 1 September 1576
    Yesterday the Senate carried a resolution whereby it was decided to buy from the physician in the hospital the remedy against the present contagious plague, which he has repeatedly offered. He was there and then paid 30,000 ducats and as many gold zechines. He and his heirs are, moreover, to receive 300 ducats every month. Yesterday the secret was made public and as soon as I receive a copy of this I will send it to Your Serene Highness.

22. Invasion of Livonia by the Russians
        unknown
        30 August 1577
    background: Truthful, pitiable and lamentable news, written by a personality of high standing from Riga, of the horrors of the Muscovite Tyranny.
    You will doubtless have learnt to a sufficiency of the unheard-of tyranny together with pillaging, murder, burnings, rapes, incest, which the Muscovite practised from the 13th day of July to the 30th day of August in practically the whole Duchy. I believe that these lamentations and this outcry cannot have been heard among the Germans. For if our Government but knew of this and believed therein, it would feel commiseration for their poor, wretched forsaken and forgotten subjects and take pity on them, though their hearts be made of steel and stone.
    In the month of July the enemy passed through the breadth and length of the country, with eleven thousand men, ravaging, burning, and taking all prisoners. Those who were aged or offered opposition were slain and in this wise three thousand people are said to have perished. It is reported that nine thousand young men have been made prisoners. The first of their hordes we could well have vanquished by God’s grace, if we had made common cause with the Courlanders and the peasants. For the Musovite had remained behind with his chief troops and the cannon, but when he saw that we were separated, defenceless and without guns, he continued his murdering tyrannical course, taking one after the other, all the towns and localities. In one place they took forty women and virgins into a garden; they were violated there and then for hours by Muscovites without number. Then they were put on horses and taken away. The Muscovite is said to be on his way to Nonnenburg with his artillery. A few places are still holding out, but the Lord grant that our rulers may realize their obligations and not permit their poor loyal subjects to be sacrificed on the shambles. The misery and grief to be seen in this country will not allow me to write any more.

23. Miraculous Healings by a Hermit
unknown
        25 June 1578
            background: Hans Noegl writes from Dillingen to Anton Bimmel the news of the 25th of June 1578.
    I cannot omit to report to Your Reverence thus: some days ago the reverend and highly learned Herr Venerandus Gabler, doctor of medicine at Tiedlingen, wrote a letter to the Provost of the College, wherein he tells, among other things, of a hermit at Toll in Burgundy, who performs miraculous doings and heals many sick people, of which Your Reverence may take cognizance from the attached copy. Should Your Reverence know of any unfortunate and sick persons, past all human aid, Your Reverence might well inform them to this effect: “I have received reliable news that there lives in Burgundy a hermit, who heals innumerable people—but only Catholics—from all manner of sickness, even those that are incurable. He has made the blind to see and the deaf to hear. Of late he has healed Magister Jacob, preacher at Freiburg in the Breisgau, who, afflicted with prolonged and severe pains, was therefore unable to use his limbs, so that he had to be carried and lifted. It is reported that in one single week there were four thousand sick people who visited this hermit, and that he aided the majority of them. The Commander of the District at Freiburg commends this to the consideration of our Commander. If there should be among the Jesuits or their relatives or pupils any sick person whom human knowledge is no longer able to relieve, he should go to the holy hermit, Vitus by name. Ills which arise in man from heredity or the French disease he will not accept for healing. He uses only prayer and fresh water and accepts nothing, no matter whosoever it be. He is greatly talked about by people of quality. This much have I wished not to withhold from Your Reverence’s friendly and well-meaning consideration in case you should not already be informed of it. Herewith I commend you and all your brotherhood to Divine Mercy.”

24. Death of King Sebastian of Portugal
        Lisbon 
        25 August 1578 
    I cannot hide from you the regrettable and unheard-of disaster which befell our King and his whole army in Africa. On the 3rd day of this month, our King marched forward to encounter the enemy, meaning to arrive at Alcazar on the same day. Now it happened that Mome Malucho was lying in wait for the King’s forces outside Alcazar with fourteen thousand men on horseback and on foot, and he sent an advance guard of about four thousand mounted troops in order to skirmish with them. This filled our King with gladness, so that he ordered his whole army to advance. The Captains of the Germans and the Italians did not deem this wise and they came of their own accord to the King to inform him that the soldiery were in no fit condition, and, moreover, tired, because they had had naught to eat for a long while. They craved therefore that they might be allowed to entrench themselves and to wait until provisions and more fighters were brought up from the fleet. The King had in all not more than twenty-three thousand men on foot and sixteen hundred on horseback. The remainder of his forces he had left behind with his fleet or had bidden them to accompany the Sherif, Mulei Mehemed, who had marched on Masegna, and whose father fell in the ensuing battle. But when the King had listened to the counsel of both Commanders, he shook his head and said: “Let us march, let us march!”  He ordered such great haste to be made that the cannon, which had formerly headed the army, was finally left behind and in the end unable to come to their assistance. Thereupon the King in person, with his horsemen began the skirmish with four thousand men. In the meanwhile more and more Turks joined in, until at last their whole army hastened on the scene in half-moon formation, surrounding our forces and taking the cannon, which fired from behind, but could hit no one but our own men.
    The Portuguese nobility withstood the onslaught for an hour, but they almost all fell on the battlefield. Likewise the Germans, Italians and Spaniards sold their lives dearly. But no more than ten or twelve of them came away alive. The rest were slain with their captains. But the Portuguese infantry surrendered at an early hour. Some of them shot first and then ran away, and some let their blunderbusses drop and surrendered.
    Our King bore himself right bravely, and, so it is said, killed many Turks with his own hands, but at last, after he had mounted the third horse, he disappeared so that no one has found him either alive or dead until this hour.
    Among the noblemen, of whom not more than sixteen are left, there is also the son of the Duke of Braganza, a young Lord, who drove in a gilt coach to meet the enemy. He had a thousand riflemen with him which his father had given him for his protection. But these were all mown down, and the young Lord was taken from the carriage, for he was believed to be the King. The Turks threw him twice into the air for joy, but he cried out that he was not the King, but the son of the Duke of Braganza, and besought them that his life might be spared as his father would ransom him with much money. With this the Turks were well satisfied.
    When this sorry news came unto us, you can well imagine how great were the lamentations, the despair and the grief, not only in this city, but in all the land. The men went about as if dazed. The wailing of the women was so loud that it can be compared with that which arose at the taking of Antwerp. It is a woeful matter to lose in one day the King, their husbands, their sons, and all the goods and chattels they had with them. But what is even more terrible is that this kingdom now must fall under Spanish rule, which they can brook the least of all. May God Almighty therefore perform a miracle by our pious old Cardinal, who is a man of sixty-four, and grant him a male heir. It is also said that His Highness is willing to marry for the sake of this kingdom. Although there were others of the royal blood, such as the Infant Antonio, they have all fallen in this battle. Not one is left but our Cardinal, who made his way here at once on receiving the pitiful tidings. As is reported, the pledge of loyalty will be sworn unto him next week.
    Otherwise business here continues as though nothing untoward had taken place. The ships that arrived from India are being unloaded, the merchants ply their trade and go to sea; it is the nobility and soldiers alone who have perished. No merchant has suffered thereby since they all stayed behind. The four regents whom the King appointed to rule the kingdom in his absence were ratified in their office by the Cardinal. The Government and officials deal with the people in so friendly a manner that every one is astounded thereat. In spite of these terrible tidings no riots have occurred and if a stranger, who had never been here before came to this city, he would swear by all that is holy that no ill-fortune has befallen this kingdom for one hundred years.
    This letter has lain here for lack of news until the 25th. To-day definite information arrived that our King fell in battle and was taken by the Moors to one of their cities, Alcazar by name. His adversary, the Moorish King Malucho, and the other Sheriff have also perished, therefore in one and the same battle three Kings and many noblemen on both sides were slain.
    The Cardinal was appointed yesterday Governor of the Kingdom by the Council, and, as decisive news of the King’s death has been received, he is to be elected King to-morrow.

25. Coronation of King Henry of Portugal
unknown
unknown
            background: Short report on the ceremonies attendant on the bewailing of the late King Don Sebastian and the election of the Cardinal of Portugal, Don Enrique, as King.
    On the 27th day of August of the year 1578 a nobleman stepped forth from the Town Hall in Lisbon, clad in black brocade, wearing a long robe closed in front, and trailing behind. Outside the Town Hall he bestrode a horse decked in black. He was given to hold in his hand a large black flag which he let trail on the ground. Three men went before him who were robed in long black cloaks which they also let drag far behind them. Each of them carried a wooden shield. First they went as far as the big church and one of them mounted the highest step and cried out aloud: “Citizens, I give you tidings that your King Don Sebastian is dead!”  Thereupon he splintered his buckler against the stone steps. Then they went to the Rua Nova, cried the same news there and broke the second buckler. From there they went to the Hospital where they destroyed the third one. These four men were followed by all the officials of the city, clad in black silken cloaks, also by innumerable crowds who wept pitifully and cried aloud: “Oh! what shall we do?”  They kicked one another with their feet and tore their hair. They also ran against the walls with their heads and did other things that were passing strange. The next day, on the morning of the 28th, between eight and nine o’clock, the Cardinal rode from the Palace of the Duke of Braganza, where he had lived, and went on his way to the Hospital. He sat on his mule, which was harnessed in beautiful red cloth, and he was clad in a long red robe. On his head he wore a Cardinal’s hat. Three counts led the mule by the halter. All the noblemen present in Lisbon—there were but few of them on account of the African battle—preceded him bareheaded and behind him went all the officials, Alcaldes and such like. Then followed six trumpeters on horseback clad in red and white damask and then three mounted drummers in black. Then came six men on horseback each of whom held a large, heavy silver mace in his hand and thereafter nine heralds in handsome doublets. They had the King’s coat of arms on back and front. Behind them rode the Duke of Braganza on a beautiful steed. He carried in his hand an unsheathed gilt sword. On his right walked Don Juan Delo. Near the Hospital there had been erected a high tribune. The Cardinal stepped on to this and took his place on a delicately wrought royal chair. In front of him there stood a table on which lay a book. When the Cardinal was seated a nobleman prostrated himself at his feet and tendered the royal sceptre unto him. Thereupon the Secretary Miguel de Moto took his oath that he would respect the privileges and liberties granted to the country by its former Kings. He then returned again amidst the sound of the trumpets and the kettledrums with unfurled standards to the house of the Duke of Braganza, who with the heralds rode ahead of him with unsheathed sword. The heralds called out in loud tones throughout the city: “Real! Real! Real!”  These cries were heard almost all day. May Almighty God give unto this King a long life and make his rule felicitous.

26. Murders in Paris
        Paris
        5 December 1578
    Of news we have none, save that on the last day of November the Secretary of the Duke of Florence, who together with the Ambassador has been here a year or two, was taken into custody by the Court Provost by order of the King. It is supposed that this was done because of several murders which were committed here some time ago, and which the Duke of Florence is said to have instigated. Not long since he caused Don Troilus d’Orsini to be shot at night by his servants between the hours of eight and nine. Suspicion falls upon him because the said Troilus stood in too close a friendship with the Duke’s sister. Some fourteen days ago, a Florentine, of the name of Capitano Bernardo, was shot in the suburb of St. Germain. The culprit was caught and put to the rack. After all his members had been broken, he was given water to drink twice as he lay on the wheel. It was only then that much information was gained from him, and it is said he confessed that he had taken money from the said Secretary to commit this and the other crime. The culprit was an Italian who has already done six people to death.

27. Auto de fé in Seville
        Seville
        3 May 1579
            background: Report of the persons who were brought as penitents to the public auto de fé, held by the Holy Court of the Inquisition.
    First: Orbrian, a native of Flanders, inhabitant of the city of Xeres de la Frontera, a binder by trade, in his thirtieth year. He had burnt different paintings with the picture of our Lord Jesus Christ and other saints thereon and had put his faith entirely in the teachings of Luther, considering them to be the truth. He had also ventured to teach others. He, showing great stubbornness on account of this, was condemned and handed over to the arm of secular justice, so that he be burnt alive and all his goods and chattels be confiscated.
    Second: Juana de Perez, a Portuguese, a woman of forty, domiciled at Riamonto. She was of the Jewish faith and held it through many years, practising its commands and ceremonies and also instructing other persons therein. She has confessed and been reconciled to Holy Church. Will be punished by taking the veil and perpetual seclusion. Her goods and chattels will be confiscated.
    Third: Juan de Color, a black, from Rafao, slave of Juan de la Romo, in his thirty-fifth year. He reviled the name of Our dear Lady and other saints when pronounced in his presence. He has, likewise, despised Her miracles. He has been reconciled and punished by taking the habit and two years of imprisonment. Thereafter he is to be restored to his master.
    Fourth: Ginos Raros, Englishman, master gunner on the galleon Granada in his fortieth year. He has fought with the Catholic Christians in the following of Juan Alquino and has comported himself by land and sea as is the custom among Lutherans. he has been reconciled, and punished with the habit and perpetual prison. The first twelve years he is to serve on the galleys and pull the oars.
    Fifth: Fernando Morisco, in his twenty-second year. He has fled from a galleon into Barbary and has disavowed his Holy Faith. He committed robbery on a galliot against God’s commandment and was therefore taken prisoner as a corsair. He has been reconciled. He has been punished with the habit and perpetual prison. He is to spend the first year on a galley.
    Sixth: Joanna Macozuo, a virgin, domestic and sick-nurse in a nunnery at Seville. She has confessed to having been tempted repeatedly and having visions of the Evil One through which she came to believe various things that are against our Holy Catholic Faith. Whereas she doubted, she has been permitted to return to the Faith. But the habit was taken from her. She is to remain for two years wherever she may be ordered to betake herself, and there fast on Fridays for one year.
    Seventh: Luis Morino desired to sail with others to Barbary but has been reconciled. He was punished with the habit and four years’ imprisonment. There he is to be instructed in the tenets of the Faith and punished with one hundred strokes of the rod.
    Eighth: Alfonso Morisco from the Kingdom of Granada. Like offence, like punishment.
    Ninth: Voror Morro, slave of Juan Matthias has incited the aforementioned. Was punished with one hundred strokes of the rod.
    Tenth: Thomas Morro. Like offence, like punishment.
    Eleventh: Maria, a virgin, daughter of Juan de Perez. She has, in company with others, given herself up to Jewish practices. She was subjected to penance so that she should recant. She has confessed and is to remain six years in prison.
    Twelfth: Lorenzo Martin in his thirtieth year. He has said that one should confess to God and not to man. That it is mockery to confess to priests and that the speech and faith of moors and Christians are alike. He has been subjected to penance and will be kept three months in prison.
    Thirteenth: Juan Corineo, a Moor, wanted to sail to Barbary and has said: “Our dear Lady did not conceive as a virgin." Has been punished with one hundred strokes of the rod.
    Fourteenth: Fray Juan de Spinosa, of the Order of the Holy Trinity. Has said Mass and heard Confession without having been ordained. Has been subjected to penance, so that he be detained six years in a cloister of the Order. As long as he lives, he will not be ordained.
    Fifteenth: Juan De Montis, a Moor, has married twice. One hundred strokes of the rod and ten years on a galley.
    Sixteenth: Juan Garcia and Fernando Domos, like offence, like punishment.
    Seventeenth: Consalvo de Noguera and Bartholomeo Gonzales for a like offence one hundred strokes of the rod and four years on a galley.
    Eighteenth: Pedro Galigo, like offence, like punishment.
    Nineteenth: Francis Gonzales, inhabitant of Cadiz, one hundred strokes of the rod and three years on the galley, and Maria de Soto, both on account of marrying twice. She recanted on the pillory and was banished from the district for three years.
    Twentieth: Pedro Fernandez, a Portuguese, for bearing false witness in matters of marriage and Rodrigo Fernandez for a like reason one hundred strokes of the rod each.
    Twenty-first: Ines de Campo for bearing false witness in matters of faith, three hundred strokes of the rod and banishment for six years from Seville. Her daughter Isabella de Palareos for like reason two hundred strokes of the rod and banishment for six years from Seville.
    Twenty-second: Fernando Copos, a Portuguese, and Juana de Ramora have averred that fornication is no sin. Have renounced and disclaimed their crime. They were publicly shamed by being led through the town.
    Twenty-third: Isabella Sanchez, Carolona Vandola, Phillippa de Color, a seamstress, Alfonso de Sansiago, Caspar Sanchez, like offence, like punishment.
    Twenty-fourth: Francisco Berocano has said that it is no sin if a woman goes to a man and the copulate. Has disavowed his words as frivolous.
    Twenty-fifth: Isabella Diaz, a Portuguese, has said that it is no sin to sleep with a strange man. Same punishment.
    Twenty-sixth: Diego de Robloz has greatly blasphemed God. Three hundred strokes of the rod and three years on the galleys.
    Twenty-seventh: Victorio Rigo has blasphemed God. Two hundred strokes of the rod.
    Twenty-eighth: Antonio Martin and Juana Batista, a Moorish woman. Like offence, like punishment.
    Twenty-ninth: Sebastian Garcia. For a like reason put into the pillory with a rope round his neck.
    Thirtieth: Juan Francis for a like reason put into the pillory with his tongue tied and a rope round his neck. Likewise, Elena Nigra, Juliana Morisca, Anna de Cranco, a Mulatto, and Martha, a Mulatto.
    Thirty-first: The Baccalaureate Andreas Perez, priest of San Salvador in Seville, was on account of various misdemeanours, necromancy and invocation of the Devil, subjected to penance and imprisoned for one year, under deprivation of priesthood.
    Thirty-second: Andreas Conseno, a peasant, has said that one must not confess one’s mortal sins to priests, because they are men. Has recanted in a public auto de fé and received one hundred strokes of the rod.
    Thirty-third: Fernando Anias, an embroiderer in silks has said: “It is of no account to God whether we fast or not—neither should we worship the pictures." Has forsworn his crime in public auto de fé.
    Thirty-fourth: Casparo Sanchez has said that God is not present in the Host.
    Thirty-fifth: Francisco Roman has said that it is not needful to pray for the souls in purgatory. Both have forsworn their crime.
    Thirty-sixth: Juan Francisco has oft-times blasphemed God and said that this was no sin. Has forsworn his crime.
    Thirty-seventh: Juan Garcia has uttered divers blasphemies, with regard to Our dear Lady. His tongue was pinioned, a cross was given into his hand ad a cord placed round his neck and he was beaten two hundred times with a rod.
    Thirty-eighth: Juan Astruez, a locksmith, Juan Lipiotol and Fernando Gil have said that they were relations of the Inquisitors. Since this is not true, they have had a rope placed round their necks and have been exposed to public shame.
    Vale! I rejoice that this is at an end.

28. A Christ taken Prisoner
        Seville, 8 June 1579
    Of news we have none of import to give you these days. But a curious occurrence recently took place five miles from here, in a village, St. Ginar by name. An inhabitant thereof took refuge in the church to escape his creditors. But whereas, according to custom, on the day of the Blessed Sacrament, all kinds of entertainment were to take place before the Procession of the Blessed Host, some inhabitants had erected a cart, on which they wished to hold a mystery play showing how our Lord Jesus Christ was captured by the Jews as he was kneeling on the Mount of Olives. But they stood in need of a stately and beauteous man and knowing of none more worthy or better looking, they craved of the man, who had taken refuge in the church because of his debts, that he would play the part of the Lord God in their play. He resisted for a long time as he dared not leave the church on account of those to whom he owed money, but the others gave him the assurance that they would bring the cart, on which the play was to be held, in front of the church; where he could mount and descend and need not harbour fear. Thereupon the latter consented. But when one of his creditors learnt this, he bethought himself of many ways in which he could have his debtor seized and thrust into prison. To that end he held counsel with an Alguazil, who informed him that he had a good friend who would play the part of Judas in the said performance. This man he would present with half a dozen ducats and instruct him that, when they arrived on the Market Place, and Judas gave our dear Lord the kiss, he should likewise give him a strong push, so that he might fall from the cart. Once he touched the ground he would immediately be made prisoner. This proposal pleased the creditor greatly. He thereupon gave the Alguazil some money and promised him more as soon as he had got his debtor into prison. thus when the procession reached the market, where the Alguazil and his minions were lying in wait, Judas at once strove to carry out his purpose, and with the Jews proceeded to approach the Lord, whom he took to the tail of the cart, where he gave him so forcible a kiss and a push, that he fell to the ground. The Alguazil captured him then and there; but as the good Lord was looking most woefully at his disciples, St. Peter, who stood next to him with his sword, took pity upon him and almost cleft the Alguazil’s head in twain. Thereupon a great turmoil ensued in the whole village, so that the Justice intervened and arrested St. Peter, the Lord, and Judas with all his Jews. Thereupon the Judge proclaimed: S E N T E N T I A, Firstly, Judas to be given the birch for a scoffer of God. Secondly, the Alguazil to have himself physicked at his own cost. Thirdly, St. Peter to be set free, as a pious and faithful apostle, and the Lord likewise. The merchant to forfeit that which the Lord owes unto him and to make no further demands upon him for all eternity.
    Of this, for lack of better news, have I wished to give tidings unto you.

29. Tournaments in Prague
        Prague
        15 June 1579
    On the 5th day of this coming month of July, Christopher Popel, the Chamberlain of His Royal and Imperial Majesty, is to hold his nuptials with the daughter of the late Molard, here in Prague, where, at the same time as other frolic, there will be held such like jousts, at which Duke Ferdinand of Bavaria will be Mantenator, as are set forth in the challenge attached hereby. Above all be it known that: whereas the lofty and supreme Pallas, the Goddess of Wisdom and Arms has heard the news that the Knights of the far-famed and illustrious roman Court exercise themselves in an elegant, yet manly fashion, in all manner of knightly prowess, with assiduity, diligence, zeal and fervour, she has derived therefrom no little joy, being a lover and patron of such arts. To encourage Knights to even greater perseverance and ardour in the exercise of armed skill, and to restrain them from idleness from which spring vice and mischief of all kinds, also to fire them with greater zest in the practice of jousts, she has recalled from the Campis Eysiis, the mighty Knight Philotetus of Greece, who performed such doughty deeds at the siege of Troy and showed himself specially versed in the arts of joust, above all others. Him she sent to the Royal Capital of Prague, in order that he might there promote a new joust with the honourable knighthood. All this she does the more willingly, since she learnt that in the coming month of July there is to take place a notable and stately wedding in the aforementioned city of Prague, at which, doubtless many a good Knight will be present. Therefore, the great Goddess aforenamed wishes one and all of the knighthood to know that they have been asked to attend upon the 6th day of the coming month of July at 12 o’clock at noon, in the square Philocteti, in Prague, in order to essay a new and famous joust under the aforementioned Knight Philotetus as Mantenator. To prove more clearly the pleasure and delight which the mighty Goddess takes in the knighthood and their love of jousts, she has decreed that her own picture or statue be erected on the said square, so that it may serve for this new joust and also act as a fresh incentive, and instil into the whole knighthood even greater joy and enthusiasm. She will also be present at the time stated and at the appointed place. In what guise prizes are to be won or lost at this joust, and how people are to deport themselves follows hereunder: The figure erected will hold in its hand an iron ring or an iron target, at which competitors are to tilt or whereon they are to break their spears. The aforementioned Mantenator will run three carreras with each of the competing Venturiers for a Pretium (prize) of ten to one hundred thalers. Likewise such races are to be run in masques without weapons or armour of any sort, iron gloves or such like privilege. To this end each Venturier is to present himself to the Judge in order that it may be seen and proved that he does not have such advantage or make use of it over the Mantenator.
    No one is to run with spears other than those which are handed out by the Judges. Whoever, in the three races breaks several spears on the target, will be deemed to have won the Pretium. Two hits are to count for one broken spear. Whoever tilts the spear lower than the target, either in jumping or in running, ere he arrives thereat, and missing it, again raises the spear and then makes a hit or breaks the spear, is to be held as having won the race. Whoever takes his aim before, or in the act of jumping, is to be disqualified. Whoever breaks the spear after the race or in parrying across the shoulder so that it touches the shoulder, is not to be permitted to win. Whoever grasps (or handles) the spear improperly or is lacking in the elegance required from him, is likewise held to have lost the prize. No one is to be allowed to change his steed during the three carreras. If anyone through soreness of foot or other such legitimate cause be prevented from completing the race, he may be permitted to run in another, but should his horse not run properly and so make it impossible for him to finish the race, he will then be held to have lost it.
    Should the Mantenator and a Venturier obtain the same points in the breaking of the spear or hitting the target, they are not to run again; but he has won, who, according to the verdict of the Judge has carried himself through the race in the most elegant and seemly fashion. Since it has occurred at various times that the Pretium was accorded even to those who ran with but little grace, the Mantenator craves of the Judges that they keep a keen eye upon the manner in which the race is run because the Mantenator has much to do with the race, and the Venturier but little. This is case he and the Venturier have scored alike in breaking and hitting. The Judges, in order to award the prize, are not to take into account the number of the runs, but the graceful bearing of the competitors during the race. Should doubts arise, they are to be left to the competence of the Judges.
    Herewith and finally the Mantenator craves of the Judges that they adjudicate strictly and solely according to this capitulation. This much will the worthy Knight Philotetus always deserve from the Judges.
    Thereupon follow the prizes:
    Whosoever breaks the first spear most gracefully and felicitously on the target or the ring, is to win the first prize.
    Whosoever in three races, breaks the most spears, or makes the most hits also wins a prize.
    Whosoever breaks the most spears in a Folia, is to receive accordingly the Folia prize.
    Whosoever is hailed by the eminent Goddess as Mascolo, is to win the Mascolo prize.
    From these four prizes, the Mantenator, as is customary, will not consider himself to be excluded.

30. Letter from Cochin-China
        Cochin in India, 10 January 1580
    Honourable, most kindly and dear Signor Adelgais!
    Before my departure from Lisbon I informed you how I with my companions boarded our ships. Upon the 4th day of April 1579 all five vessels sailed from Lisbon at the same time; but we did not however, keep together for more than six days, but each soon struck out on its own course, since each captain or pilot believes he knows best how to arrive first at the goal. Although these ships are big and powerful, they strive not to stay together. When we had been on our way for a month and had chanced first on the coast of Guinea and later upon the Linea Aequinoxialis, we realized that we had left Lisbon far too late. We had to sail back and forth along this Linea until we could pass it, and in this wise lost forty-seven days. Since at this time the sun shines at its strongest and hottest, we had to suffer great heat and torment on this voyage. From thence as far as the thirty-fourth degree in the other half of the globe, towards the South pole or the Pole Antarctico, as far as the Cape of Good Hope, we had a favourable wind and fair weather, but severe cold. From thence onward we experienced several great storms. To tell the truth, I would have preferred then to be elsewhere than on this voyage. God be praised, we came through. But it is an old experience in seafaring that come or go, one has to meet such storms. This danger lasts for one hundred and fifty miles, which one covers in thirty-four days. We then arrived at the twenty-sixth degree off the height of Mozambique. There the King of Portugal keeps a fort and a garrison. But whereas it was late in the year, we were not permitted to land, but stayed out at sea fifty miles therefrom. If we had gone ashore, we should not have been able to leave again. We then came upon the Linea Aequinoxialis which we passed in three days. Thereupon we passed on again to the other side towards the North Pole.
    Here in Cochin we are situate on the ninth degree from this line and on the side of Europe. Lisbon lies thirty-nine degrees off this line. In this place it is rather warm since we are just under the ninth degree. We arrived, thanks and praise be to the Lord Almighty, upon the 10th day of October at the town of Goa, which belongs to the King of Portugal and is the finest capital in this country. Thus we have been on our way here from Lisbon six months and six days, and during that time have seen no land, only the sky and the sea. The Lord God bestows on such journeys His special blessing and mercy, for otherwise it would not be possible to spend half a year between the planks. To sum up, whosoever is well equipped with provisions and a cook, both of which were mine, thanks to the Lord, feels the hardships of such a voyage less than the common people, who suffer great distress from lack of food and drink, especially water, which no money can buy. In such heat one cannot partake of much wine, only water, of which, thanks be to God, I had in sufficient quantity with our food. There were about five hundred persons in our ship of whom not more than twenty-five altogether died on the way from Portugal to India. Some of us, who were well provided with food and drink, extended much help to the poor soldiery. In this half year we have traversed five thousand miles. Although for the direct route from Lisbon to India one counts not more than three thousand miles, one covers at all times for each voyage five thousand miles on account of the head winds.
    I have seen many kinds of fish, whereof there would be much to write, especially of those that fly above the sea and have wings. This many will not wish to believe, but I have seen them a thousand times fly as near as the musket will carry. What called forth still greater surprise on my part were other big fishes that are in the ocean and that eat man alive, whereof I have been myself a witness. For when a man fell from our ship into the sea during a strong wind, so that we could not wait for him or come to his rescue in any other fashion, we threw out to him on a rope a wooden block, especially prepared for that purpose, and this he finally managed to grasp and thought he could save himself thereby. But when our crew drew this block with the man toward the ship and had him within half the carrying distance of a musket shot, there appeared from below the surface of the sea a large monster, called Tiburon; it rushed on the man and tore him to pieces before our very eyes. That surely was a grievous death.
    There were also many kinds of birds upon the sea, among them many which never see land, but always dwell upon the waters. They eat fish and do not fear the people on the ship. We have with our hands caught several of these birds. They are the size of ducks, but are reputed not to be fit to eat, because they smack so strongly of fish.
    I have related our journey day by day, and have made therewith a book, which in good time, if God helps me out of this again, I shall bring with me together with many beauteous things. This voyage is of such nature that he who does not experience it himself, could not believe how arduous it is. Thanks be to God, that myself and my men, four young Germans, have arrived here in India fresh and well; but no sooner did we set foot on land, than four young Portuguese servants of mine expired. On the ship eating and much drinking of water causes havoc, and ashore it is dangerous for some time, because of the many fruits, such as figs and other foods. But also there is a danger on account of the women, of whom there is an abundance. From all the ships a good many men died ashore. Until a man gets acclimatized he has to guard himself wisely. Thanks be to God, I am very well.
    Our ships have all five arrived from Lisbon, namely, three in Goa and two here. Now all five ships are here in Cochin. I made a sojourn of four weeks in the town of Goa and built me there a house. From thence I travelled one hundred miles onwards by sea. The voyage can be made in ten to twelve days. The ships are loaded with pepper here in Cochin, twenty miles from Calicut, wherefore they all have to come to this place. I shall maintain two establishments, one in Goa and the other here. I have not yet, however, resolved upon which shall fall my choice for remaining definitely. Although Goa is the capital in which the Viceroy of Portugal holds his Court, it is wearisome to journey back and forth every year, as I needs must be present in this our pepper store.
    Such a pepper store is a fine business, but it requires great zeal and perseverance. It takes six weeks to receive the pepper from the heathen King of Cochin, who is our friend, and to load it into our ships. After the departure of these ships for Portugal I and my servants have but little to do. The pepper business is profitable indeed; when the Lord God grants by His mercy that none of the ships take damage either in coming or going, then the merchants wax rich. With these sailings, all depends upon the right time to take the journey, to wit, during the month of March from Lisbon to this place, and from here to Portugal during the month of January. Also, when this can be arranged, to leave neither place later than upon the 15th day of these months. Then the risk is slight. But it is dangerous to take one’s departure later, for then one comes across heavy storms, and has to go by a circuitous route, and often the ships are destroyed. This happens but rarely, provided the ships do not run aground, founder or otherwise come to grief. Great caution has to be practised in these respects.
    This year, in my judgment, we shall not dispatch more than four ships with about twenty loads, although we ought to send thirty. We already possess the money, for so large a sum would not be obtainable by loan. What we are lacking this day can be bought, given a good opportunity, after the sailing of these ships for next year. Of all other spices such as cloves, nutmeg, flour and nuts, cinnamon, maces, and various drugs, this year’s supplies are going to Portugal. In precious stones little was dispatched this year on account of the war, which the heathen Kings (of which there are many in this country) waged one upon another. Because of this, precious stones cannot come through from inland into our towns since all of them lie upon the shores of the sea.
    All that lieth inland belongs to the Indians, heathens and Moors. We boast of the friendship of two or three of these Kings, but the majority are our enemies. Our fleet is continually fighting them at sea. The King of Portugal despite all his power is too weak for this vast country. The King of Spain, if he but took possession of Portugal, would be the right King for these lands. He should take over the whole of India all the kingdoms and provinces right into China, where it adjoins Tartary, and unite under his rule his Spanish India with the Portuguese municipalities: this he could accomplish with fifty thousand men. Even though the Kindian Kings have a goodly number of warriors, and there are many such Kings, they are not good fighters. One Christian can achieve more than six Indians. Besides, these Kings are continually involved in strife and quarrels amongst themselves.
    The land in itself is bad, it produces all the corn, rice and meat that is needed, but no wine and no olive oil: it also lacks five or six kinds of fruit. Wine, oil and Dutch cheese are brought from Portugal. The country is equally warm throughout the year, in winter as in summer. There exists no difference in the seasons. In winter it is as hot as in summer, only that it rains throughout the whole winter, which in summer it does not do. The days are of twelve hours’ duration all the year round, they grow neither longer nor shorter. The trees and grass remain verdant throughout the year. We have figs here that are as large as the span of the hand, which figs are picked from the trees the whole year round. One may pick them every day, they are the most important and the staple food for rich and poor alike. It grows on beautiful tall trees, which are called palms. These bear a fruit of the size and shape of a melon which contains much water. Whosoever does not know or see it, cannot imagine what manner of things can be made from this fruit. Thou canst however completely trust in me, for my information is good.
    From this fruit one maketh wine, which is good to drink, also oil which is good for eating and burning, also milk and fat and a special paper on which one can write. This fruit is kept in store rooms. Its husk is used for making wooden crockery, dishes and other things. Moreover, one makes out of these trees all that is needed for navigation, to wit, the ship, mast, sails, nails, ropes, cables, tow, and likewise wooden bricks for roofing houses. These ships carry provisions in food and drink which are also derived from this tree. I have already seen myself ships thus fashioned. It is a strange thing, and I have desired not to omit to advise thee of this with all the other curiosities here. With God’s help, I will write to thee in this coming year more particulars about curious customs and strange happenings; but they are as yet new to me, though I have already been in this country for three months. Every day I see new usages about which one might write a large book. I will endeavour, as time goes on to collect many strange things and after five years, if I continue in my present purpose, to take them home with me. God willing, I shall employ for my home-coming another route, namely, one by land. From here one goes by sea towards Ormus in Arabia, thence to Persia and there one has good opportunity to travel through the Sophi’s land and Turkey. As I learn from those that come and go from Italy, this is a very good road, for it is much used. One finds people in Ormus who assure one that they will bring you safely from Ormus to Italy. It appears quite a common thing. I shall, however, inform myself well beforehand since I have the time to do so. By this route it is not quite two thousand miles from here to Italy or Germany and these one can cover within six months: moreover the Holy Land and Jerusalem and other such like places can be visited on the way, and so I feel much more inclined to see something more of these lands, than to go by sea, where one is in hourly peril of the ship suffering damage or being wrecked.
    I ought to recount to thee many other such strange things, which however cannot be done at this moment. In the coming year I will send thee a picture to show how every one is dressed here, to wit, bare or naked, man and women. The King and noblemen as well as the common man, only cover their shame. The Portuguese are clad only in very light garments, linen or silk. On account of the heat, woollens cannot be worn. People here have many beliefs and ceremonies. But as time goes, more and more Indians are converted to Christendom though others remain heathens. The Moors and the Jews retain their Faith. In these lands many creeds exist, but in the towns belonging to the Portuguese, the heathens or Indians are mostly converted to the Christian Faith. I also cannot omit to tell you of another custom of this country. All the Kings have always thirty, forty, yes, even one hundred wives, as many as it pleases them to keep. When such a King dies or perishes in battle, these his wives must throw themselves into the fire and burn to death. In many places outside this town it is the custom also among the common heathen people that the widow of a dead heathen must likewise allow herself to be burnt alive. If she does not, she is mocked and derided. There exists still another custom. When a maiden of a noble house or of reputed ancestry marries, her kinsmen strive to persuade the King to sleep with her the first night. Much money is given to him to that end, otherwise she cannot marry. Of such customs there are many more besides this.
    Also, I would tell thee that the five ships from Portugal were sent to our master. Thou shouldst know that from the sale of wine, oil, Dutch Cheese, fish, paper and other things, usually the greatest profit is derived; this time no gain at all remains. All this has brought in no more than twelve to fifteen per cent., and on the ready cash brought from Lisbon one makes but a profit of twenty-five per cent. The country is no longer as it was formerly, and apart from this, our Viceroy imposes so many new taxes that all commerce diminishes. If he remains here, no good will come of it. I am of the belief however, that the King of Portugal will send hither another Viceroy when he hears of the doings of this present one. There is no merchandise now that can be sent with profit from here to Portugal.
    In precious stones there is nothing this year; in fact this country is not such as is generally imagined. It takes as much trouble to earn money here as in other places. Things are no longer what they were twenty years ago. Buying and selling here is more profitable than sending many wares to Portugal. German merchandise has no market here and is useless for this country. Writing tables split in the great heat, clockwork, or anything else made of iron, deteriorates at sea. This year there is nothing to send to Portugal, for pepper, ginger, maces, cocoa-nut fat have all been brought for the contractors, also cinnamon for the King. One really does not know this time in what to invest one’s money.
    The fisher has imported Dutch cheese, but is not going to derive great profit from it, since much of it was stolen aboard ship. This likewise happened to our stores. In addition, our sales have been bad. Five ships can bring much into port, and thus everything becomes cheap. The Portuguese here are even more diligent than the people in Lisbon. The Pietras de Bezoar are always very dear and not good. After the ships have departed I will try to obtain privately some of these stones that are good, and to send them to thee next year.

31. The Death of Philippine Welser
        Innsbruck, 1580
    The Most Serene Princess and Lady, Philippine, Consort of the Serene and Highborn Prince and Lord, Ferdinand, Archduke of Austria, was taken ill by Divine Ordinance of God Almighty, on the 14th day of April of the year 1580, and has on the 24th day of the said month, taken leave from this vale of tears in a Christian, peaceful and exemplary manner.
    After the most worthy Princess had felt very weak on the 23rd day of the above-named month, she made her confession, according to Catholic custom and at the advice and instigation of her Father Confessor, in deep repentance and sorrow. The ensuing day, between 5 and 6 o’clock in the morning she received the Blessed Sacrament with special devoutness, and several hours thereafter, Extreme Unction with great reverence. But her strength ebbing little by little, she implored her Lord and Spouse, in submission and humility, graciously to extend his pardon to her, in case she had not always lived obediently as was the gracious will and pleasure of His Princely Highness, or contravened his wishes by word or deed. The pious Princess gave proof of so great and constant a forbearance that not one single sign of impatience was she seen to make.
    She was heard to say several times that she was willing and ready to suffer patiently these and other pains, as long as the dear Lord willed it thus. Whereas even in her death struggle she preserved her consciousness and clear speech, she listened with joy when spoken to about heavenly matters and herself continuously begged God for forgiveness of her sins, for patience, perseverance in the Christian Faith and for help against all wicked temptations. She often and firmly prayed:
    “Oh, Thou merciful God, forgive me my sins and trespasses. Father, I have sinned before Heaven and before Thee and am not worthy to be called Thy Child. Lord, let my soul be cleansed in Thy rose-red blood, let Thy bitter Death and Thy joyful Resurrection be my victory and triumph.”
    Although she had been warned on account of her bodily weakness not to say the prayers aloud, she was yet able to manifest that in her heart she repeated all those that were said in her presence, especially the Paternoster, the Angelus, and the Credo. Likewise, many beautiful things did she say during the last moments of her life. The cross of Indulgence with which she had been honoured by His Holiness the Pope she was seen to kiss reverently and unceasingly and on three occasions she was heard to laugh unexpectedly. And as His Serene Highness questioned her why she was laughing, she made answer: “I see that which gladdens me.”
    She was by nature of so virtuous and modest a dispostion that even in her death agony she would not permit the least uncovering of her body, and drew her sleeves over her arms down to her wrists. She humbly commended her brother, Herr Carl Welser, Chief Chamberlain to His Highness, to the favour of Her Serene Spouse. When she at last became aware that God was about to make an end of her, she gazed lovingly at His Serene Highness and gave him her right hand with the words: “May God take care of you!”  Thereupon she imparted to her most beloved sons the motherly warning not to displease their father, but to render unto him most perfect obedience. Likewise, she gave her blessing to Herr Ferdinand, Duke of Upper and Lower Bavaria, and Herr Otto Heinrich, Duke of Brunswick. She bade the Duke of Bavaria to take leave in her name of all the princely house of Bavaria. She counselled Herr Jaroslav of Kolowrat, a young nobleman and blood relation, to avoid giving His Serene Highness any cause for displeasure. Shortly afterwards, she stretched forth her right hand to all present and commended them to God. When the Duke Ferdinand of Bavaria had held the burning candle for her for a long time, she said to His Serene Highness: “Your Dilection is getting tired!”  In short, Her Serene Highness conducted herself until the very last with complete and unimpaired intelligence, in a most Christian and God-fearing manner, in word and deed towards God and her relatives. To the Eternal and bounteous Deity, from Whom sprang the blessed dead, be all Praise, Honour and Glory for all times! May He grant this Christian Princess a glorious resurrection. Amen, dear Lord Jesus Christ! Amen!

32. Disputes at the Court of Prague
        Prague
        15 May 1580
    Last week, Monsieur de Roche, Imperial Carver, and Allegret d’Allegretti, Imperial Lord High Steward, fell into dispute while gambling in the refectory. They unsheathed their rapiers, against one another. Whereupon the following sentence was passed in the presence of all Court officials: Monsieur de Roche as originator of this and other quarrels after serving his sentence of imprisonment, is to be confined for a further month in the White Tower here. Thereafter he is to quit the Imperial Court, and to shun this, as well as all the Hereditary Lands of the Crown at the risk of body and soul. Allegret d’Allegretti, after having served his term of imprisonment, is to leave the Emperor’s Court within fifteen days and to be banished from it for ever. This punishment has been ordained at the personal behest and order of His Imperial Majesty.

33. The Spaniards Conquer Lisbon
        Lisbon
        1 September 1580
    My neglect in writing to you for so long a time is due to the war and strife we have had here. For on the 25th day of August the Duke of Alba conquered Lisbon at the point of the sword. The saying goes that nigh upon three thousand persons perished on the side of the Portuguese, part of whom I myself have seen in the outer town. The dead lay heap on heap like swine. I went in the company of the Count of Lodron, who is quartered in our house, to the field of battle. All the streets are filled with dead men and horses, so that we had to walk across them as on a bridge. Some are still alive, one man lifted a foot, another a hand, yet another his head. Altogether it was a pitiable sight. The outer town also which is much larger than the town proper, was plundered for the duration of three whole days. Everything was taken away. Not a nail in the wall was left. But no soldiers came into the town, because the Duke of Alba sternly forbade it. The army is still encamped without the town. Thanks be to God, no harm has come to us.
    Four days ago five ships arrived here from India. One more was to have come which had sailed this year for Portuguese India, but it turned back on its way. No one can say what became of the ships that were sent out to meet the fleet.

34. Execution of a Bohemian Nobleman for Street Robbery
        Prague
        30 October 1580
    I know nothing of note whereof to write to you, save that at the last session of the Provincial Law Court the beheading of a stately nobleman, of the name of Vodratsky, who had committed robbery, was ordered to take place, on the 20th day of the month. He was a man of about sixty years of age. His estates were worth over one hundred and fifty thousand thalers, and now they have all fallen to his Imperial Majesty. There was much sorrowing on his account, for after he was sentenced, his wife, with four daughters and two sons all prostrated themselves at the feet of the Emperor, the Empress, and the nobles of the land. This scene took place in public in the Diet Chamber and was most pitiable. His Imperial Majesty granted a reprieve, and Vodratsky might be alive and well now, yet he did not wish this, but said that whatsoever punishment was due to him, he was ready to take. fourteen days earlier he dined with Herr von Brunnenstein, who in vain attempted to dissuade him from his purpose. As he came out, free and unfettered from the palace he halted outside the Diet Chamber from whence the officers looked down upon him. With these he held converse for nigh on half an hour until the noble lords were moved to tears, for he entreated them on behalf of his children and commended them to their care, so that they might not be driven from his estates. Thereupon he wrote a letter in the Tower wherein he besought the people to forget him. This the aged Herr von Wartenberg, who has Vodratsky’s sister for spouse, communicated to His Majesty. Thereupon Herr von Wartenberg weeping, brought the following message: “The Clerk is to accept this letter and after the sentence has been carried out and Justice has received its due, it is to be read out in public." Whereupon he, Vodratsky, proceeded to his execution halting a long time before Herr von Dietrichstein and praying for his children. He then went valiantly to his death and was beheaded on a black cloth spread upon the ground. Not far from this spot a carriage waited with a bier thereon. The carriage was drawn by four horses draped in black, and behind it was led his favourite steed. When he had been executed, his servants wrapped him in the black shroud, laid him upon the bier and conveyed him to his domain, where he was buried.
    There are still many such fellows in this land, and as rumour has it, the names of one hundred and thirty are registered on a list.

35. War between the English and the Irish
        London
        19 November 1580
    From Ireland we receive the news that the Spaniards and rebels have taken up fortified positions upon the seashore at Smerwick where they are besieged by the English by land and water. A large ship from Spain laden with grain was forced by a ship of the Royal Fleet to run on to the rocks. The crew took refuge in the fortress, but the corn remained in the ship.
    Forty-six horses laden with gold and silver for the Treasury of the Queen, have arrived here this week, each horse carrying two hundred and twenty pounds in weight. It is believed that this represents her share for promising to defend Captain Drake. It seems as though he will again make an expedition to the Moluccas, which voyage he can accomplish there and back again within twelve months.

36. Wailings in Prague
        Prague
        14 February 1581
    A few days ago towards noon, just as we were about to partake of our meal, a noise resembling thunder or the fire of muskets, passed, travelling swiftly over the town. And during the ensuing night the sound of lamentation was heard behind the palace, and likewise by the look-out in the White Tower. The same cries also arose in the Old Town. The bohemians call this the “Mother in Travail,” who in time past has appeared, emitting similar wailings. Thereafter a terrible plague broke out so that people fell ill in the street, leaned against a wall, dropped to the ground and died. But none here pay heed to it, and the Bohemian people surrender themselves to godlessness and fornication. May God preserve us from sudden death and may He manifest His mercy unto us!

37. Religious Feuds in Antwerp
        Cologne
        20 April 1581
    Those of the Reformed Faith in Antwerp now covet the Church of St. Michael, which has been previously refused to the adherents of the Augsburg tenets. It is supposed however, that those aforementioned will obtain not only this church, but finally all the churches. On the 13th day of this month Burgomaster Junius arrived in Antwerp at the Convent of St. Clair with the renegade Abbot of St. Bernard. They urged upon the nuns that it was not good to live so secluded a life, and exhorted them to leave the cloister and to be married. The spouse of the said Abbot is especially reported to have spoken many lewd words. This is the beginning of an attempt to entice all the clerics from the monasteries and the town of Antwerp.

38. Iconoclasm in Belgium
        Antwerp
        2 May 1581
    Eight days ago the soldiery and the Calvinists mutilated all the pictures and altars in the churches and cloisters of Belgium. The clergy and near on five hundred Catholic citizens were driven out and several among them cast into prison. Thus an end has been made of the Catholic Faith in Brussels, and Calvinism has been installed in its stead. Since then, the masters of the guilds or brotherhoods, and the artisans, whose ancestors had founded several beautiful chapels and altars in the Church of our Dear Lady, have demanded that they themselves should be allowed to remove from the church the painted pictures and other ornaments. Upon the evening of the Feast of the Ascension they began to pull down the altars, occupied the churches and kept them locked until this day. . . . It is not known whether they will destroy everything within the church, but it is believed that it will come to pass here as it did in Brussels. . . . But as Catholics and Calvinists cannot keep peace with the Lutherans and Anapapists it will ill serve the promotion of commerce and many persons will leave this town.
        Antwerp, 6 May 1581
    Four ships lie here laden with sculptured and carved statues, bells, brass and stone effigies of saints, brass candlesticks and other such like ornaments from the churches. All these are to be dispatched to Narva and Moscow. The consigners hope to do good business with them.
        Antwerp, 5 July 1581
    In the past days the Calvinists here have wrought much havoc. On the day of St. Jacques they ravaged the Church of Our Lady, the Church of St. Jacques, and the Palace Chapel, as well as the Convent of St. Michel, where up to now the Catholics held their religious exercises and ceremonies, in such fashion that they have wrecked everything therein, with the exception of the organ and a few pictures. They spared nothing and destroyed everything completely. On the 27th day in broad daylight, a Captain of the burghers, a painter with sundry artisans went with large hammers and other iron instruments into all the monasteries, chapels, hospitals and other houses of God, in short to every place where there still existed pictures and altars and destroyed them. Many of the wooden effigies were burned in the streets, where the burghers kept guard. Not one person did protest against this, since the rule of the clergy is completely destroyed and at an end here.

39. Ban on the Catholic Faith at Antwerp
        Antwerp
        15 July 1581
    This afternoon at 1 o’clock, the Town Council issued an announcement whereby it is no longer permitted to practise the Catholic Religion. It is still, however, permissible for Catholics to baptize their children in their own fashion and have their marriages blessed by their priests. The adherents of the Reformed Faith wish to have it all their own way, but this kind of rule will not endure as time goes on, and evil will arise from it, for too much rope is being given to the community.

40. A Postal Courier Robbed near Cologne
        Cologne
        20 July 1581
    The Nuremberg courier arrived here from Antwerp on the 15th day of his month and again left on his way to Nuremberg. But an eighth of a mile from the town all the letters which he had received here were taken from him, partly opened and torn up, or thrown into the fields. What has become of the courier himself it is impossible to ascertain.

41. Philip II woos Elizabeth of France
        Prague
        4 August 1581
    Although the King of Spain covets the Queen of France as his spouse, the Queen has not wished to yield to suasion and much prefers to remain a widow.

42. The Citizens of Cologne rise against their Elector
        Cologne
        10 August 1581
    Recently it was reported that the citizens of Cologne had held before the town, a prize-shooting in musketry, which the Elector was not minded to sanction. The citizens, however, persisted and it so happened that upon the 4th day of the month the musketeers of His Grace came with divers horses from Neuss and were wishful to proceed to the Priel. The horses were led past far from the town, but the musketeers, about twenty-five to thirty, came across the field close by the town and wanted to see the shooting. The citizens and the contestants however, thought that they had come by order of the Elector to prevent the shooting. A turmoil arose during which one of the Elector’s musketeers was shot dead and eleven were taken prisoner. The alarm was given in the city and the rumour spread among the inhabitants that the Bishop was slaying the burghers and contestants before the gates of the town.Thereupon the inhabitants’ anger was roused and part of the people ran out to the assistance of those whom they believed to be attacked. Apart from this, the populace resolved to inflict much damage upon the clergy. It was most fortunate that the Bishop took no notice of the occurrence, otherwise but few of the richest clerics in the town would have escaped unscathed. Thus often from a small spark a large fire arises. It is hoped that the Elector and the town will make peace.

43. Persecution of Jesuits in England
        Antwerp
        16 September 1581
    Several English Jesuits, who had come from Rouen to London, and, at the behest of the Pope, were trying to convert the people to their Faith, were taken prisoner in London. Three were hanged and two were quartered. They are said to have committed all manner of treachery and to have denounced the Queen shamefully. A further sixteen are to be executed.

44. Suicide of a Protestant Minister on Account of Bigamy
    unknown
        4 October 1581
    Last Will and Testament of the Magister Johannes Scheerer. He was a Lutheran and was driven out of Nuremberg because he was known to have two wives. According to this his testament, he stabbed himself from despair.
    “Firstly, I have confessed all my sins to God and to my Saviour Jesus Christ, with Whom I shall shortly be, and have with all diligence recited the seven Penitential Psalms.
    “Secondly, I console myself with the words of my Lord Jesus Christ, who said ‘I am the way, the truth and the Life and the Resurrection, he whoever believeth in Me shall live even though he die.’
    “Thirdly, I commit my beloved and devout wife, together with our seven small children to the Holy Trinity, and all holy angels, that they may guard and care for them at all times. I also commend them to the honourable and wise Counsillors in this city, who, I trust, will be their father, in memory of the services of their father, and I leave this world joyously and blissfully. I have taken as my example all the saints who on account of life eternal, have held their bodies here in light esteem and have often jumped into the water or taken other means in order speedily to depart from this life. With peace and happiness I go. Cleobrotus, a heathen, died willingly from desire and joy in eternal life. How much more, then, shall a Christian do likewise?”

45. The Prince Elector of Saxony in Prague
        Prague
        24 October 1581
    On the 19th day of this month, the Elector of Saxony accompanied by his spouse, his son and a young Count Palatine of Zweibrücken arrived here with horses and carriages in fair number. His Imperial Majesty accompanied by as many of his Councillors and courtiers as were present, rode courteously to meet him. As soon as the Elector drew near, both the Emperor and the Elector dismounted from their horses, and the Electress and the young Princes descended from their carriages. They made several steps towards each other and were received by His Majesty in a most friendly manner. But when the Electress desired to re-enter her coach, His Majesty took hold of her in order to assist her. This she in no way desired to permit and so they pursued this show of courtesy for a full quarter of an hour. This caused great mirth to the Elector. Finally, His Majesty desisted and took the Elector and the two young Princes into the coach with him and by the mercy of God drove to the castle of Prague. All were astounded at the most gracious humility displayed by His Imperial Majesty.

46. Marriage Plans of the Queen of England
        Paris
        22 November 1581
    Our King received tidings yesterday from England that his brother was married to the Queen on the 22nd day of the month. Some say that they have already slept together. All manner of things are said about this marriage, also that our King and his Lady Mother do not view it with displeasure. The French proverb holds good: Jeune folle, vieille enragée.

47. Terrifying Apparition in Spain.
        Madrid
        unknown
    In the country of Palamos, in the Kingdom of Catalunia, upon the 1st day of May, the day of the holy Apostles Felipe and Jaime, in the hamlet of Calongo there were seen by all the people a terrifying storm and a huge cloud, in which could be perceived a whole legion of evil spirits of various shapes and most loathsomely deformed. Some were like lions, others like wolves, others again, like dogs, and others like men or wild animals. Many also were like ravens and other black birds. The clergy proceeded to walk with the true cross from the church to the cemetery, in order to exorcize them. But all to no purpose: they paid no heed to it. When the Praepositus saw this, he carried forth the Blessed Sacrament. Then it was seen that most of the spirits rushed into a pond formed by a rivulet two stones’ throw distance from the village. Therefrom presently arose a great flame of fire and smoke, as broad and tall as a veritable belfry, rising to the very clouds. The flame stank most vilely of sulphur. Meanwhile many of the spirits circled like ravens round and round. Among them an especially frightful and terrifying bird. They tore up nine olive-trees, many nut and cherry-trees and also many tufts of grass and earth. One vineyard they burned.
    When it was seen that the storm would not cease, the Praepositus, with the most Blessed Sacrament, ascended to the church belfry, where there was such a violent wind that he fell backwards. The cross fell down from the tower without causing damage.
    From the clouds there fell much water which, however, caused but little harm. The inhabitants of this hamlet having witnessed such a gruesome and frightful occurrence remained in great fear.
    This was reported to the Supreme Council of Spain on the 22nd day of May.

48. Entry of His Imperial Majesty into Augsburg
unknown
        27 June 1582
    When His Imperial Majesty arrive in Augsburg on the 27th day of June all the Electors and other Princes present betook themselves across the stone bridge. The burghers with pipes and trumpets occupied their usual places. From three o’clock until five the entry took place in the following order:
    First came the Imperial Provost, then the horsemen of the Hereditary Marshal of State, Baron von Pappenheim, and of the Duke of Saxe-Coburg. Thereupon followed the trumpeters of the Elector of Mayence, of Treves and of the Duke Maximilian of Bavaria. Then the arquebusiers and the Bavarian pages. These were followed by the Bavarian gentlemen-in-waiting, the Salzburg trumpeters, the Salzburg nobles and horsemen. Then came the Würzburg trumpeters and horsemen and after them the halberdier lieutenant and the court officers of His Imperial Majesty. Behind them rode the troop of the Palatine of Neuenburg and of the Landgrave of Leuchtenberg and the twelve Imperial grooms, leading His Majesty’s horses, then twenty trumpeters with golden banners and the Roman Eagle. Thereupon followed the Imperial pages with His Majesty’s helmet and body armour and then came the mounted groom of His Majesty and the Princes. Then rode the equerries, dapifers, chamberlains, and other officers and Councillors of His Majesty, behind them the heralds of Bohemia and Hungary. Then followed the Lord Marshal and the Master of the Horse, and the two sons of the Count Palatine Philip Ludwig. Then came Duke Maximilian of Bavaria, Count Palatine, Philip Ludwig, Duke Johann Casimir of Saxony and then the Landgrave of Leuchtenberg. Preceding His Imperial Majesty came two heralds of the Holy Roman Empire in their official garb, thereafter His Majesty on a beautiful Spanish steed under a canopy of yellow silk. The canopy was carried by Augsburg Councillors of the highest rank. Joachim, Baron von Pappenheim carried His Majesty’s naked sword in front of him. His Majesty’s lackeys walked in front of the canopy and one hundred of the bodyguard in the Imperial livery walked at each side. Behind them rode the two ecclesiastical Electors, the Princes of Mayence and Treves and the Bishops of Salzburg and Würzburg. Then came the two marshals of His Majesty’s household, the Baron Wolf Rumpf and Herr Christoph Poppel. Behind them rode two pages with the Sword of State and the musket of His Majesty. Then came the archer Captain with three noblemen who wore beautiful morions, ornamented with gold, and behind them a hundred archers in German costume with morions and wearing armour under their coats. His Majesty’s Household and State coaches concluded the procession.
    When His Majesty had reached the market square before the cathedral and dismounted from his horse, he stepped beneath a canopy which had been prepared by the Bishop of Augsburg and the clergy. Under this he entered the cathedral. There he remained for a brief space and thereafter passed through the cathedral into the Bishop’s Palace.

49. Marriage of Archduke Ferdinand with the Princess of Mantua
        unknown
        unknown
            background: A short and simple account of what happened at the marriage of His Serene Highness Archduke Ferdinand of Austria with the Archduchess of Mantua.
    On Wednesday, the 9th day of May 1582, the gilt sword and the Archducal hat, which were sent to him by His Holiness the Pope through Franciscus, Bishop of Sebaste, were presented to His Serene Highness by the said Bishop after Mass had been said and the written message of His Holiness had been publicly read before the altar in the new cathedral at Innsbruck.
    On Friday, the 11th day of May, Duke William of Bavaria as the accredited Envoy to these nuptials of His roman Imperial Majesty arrived at Innsbruck in time for the morning meal with his beloved spouse, Maximiliana, sister of his princely grace, the Landgrave of Leuchtenberg, the two Landgravines of Baden, as well as a considerable number of Court attendants, counts, squires and noblemen, with four hundred horses in all. On the same evening the Archduke Charles of Austria arrived with his beloved Consort and the three princely offspring with a magnificent suite of attendants consisting of privy and trusted Councillors, counts, squires and noblemen, together with five hundred horses. His Serene Highness Archduke Ferdinand with his sons and Duke William of Bavaria came to meet them as far as Hall and accompanied them to Innsbruck. On the following Monday, the 14th day of May, the date of the nuptial ceremony and the entry, Archduke Ferdinand rode beyond the cloister of Wilten, alongside the mountain Isel, with Duke Wilhelm of Bavaria as Imperial Envoy, Archduke Charles of Austria, Cardinal Andreas of Austria and their stately and impressive retinue. Among the courtiers were Count Wilhelm von Zimbern, who entered Innsbruck with forty-one horses, Count Hannibal von Hohenembs, the Counts von Thurn, Schwarzenberg, Liechtenstein, Ortenburg and many other counts, squires and noblemen. From Innsbruck as far as the mountain Isel there lined up five thousand lansquenets and arquebusiers, clad in armour. Several tents had been erected on this spot, among them two which were particularly large. There their Serene Highnesses dismounted and awaited the royal bride, who presently arrived with her mother, the Duchess of Mantua, Duke Ferdinand of Bavaria and the Margrave of Baden. These two Princes had been dispatched on a mission to Mantua with eighty horses to accompany the plighted bride. The members of the Court and the squires of Tyrol had been sent to meet her as far as the frontier below Rovereto. They remained in the other tent opposite that of His Serene Highness until the ninety pieces of heavy ordinance, which had been brought from the armoury, and the arequebusiers had fired. After this was done, Archduke Ferdinand with the above-mentioned princely personages went on foot half way between the two tents in order to greet his beloved promised bride by word of mouth as well as the royal personages who had accompanied her. The Count von Hohenembs welcomed the mother of the bride in the Italian language and Herr Caspar Baron von Wolkenstein made reply and gave thanks.
    Thereupon the entry began. At the head were the whole of the mounted troops and the servitors together with the trumpeters and the army drummers, then followed the counts, squires and nobility, the Landgrave of Leuchtenberg, both Margraves of Baden and Burgau, Duke Ferdinand of Bavaria, the Prince of Mantua, the Cardinal of Austria, then Archduke Ferdinand. On his right rode the Imperial Envoy, Duke Wilhelm of Bavaria, on his left Archduke Carl of Austria. Then followed the betrothed Princess with her mother, and a stately retinue of ladies-in-waiting in elegant gilt litters, and carriages on springs. On either side stood the aforesaid soldiery. They rode through three large triumphal arches, fashioned of woodwork and cloth. The first was in front of the Gateway of St. George, where stood eight men holding the coat of arms of the hereditary lands of His Serene Highness, and Latin verses, celebrating the country’s joy at the arrival of their future mistress. The second arch was near the Gate of the Outer City: it was ornamented with an artificial weir and four springing fountains. The third was in the town in the square in front of the Tyrol Chamber with the golden roof. Hereon stood four heroes, and above them twenty-eight boys in gilt clothing with silver bells, and yet above these a band. As soon as the procession had dismounted from the horses, litters and coaches, it wended its way towards the new Imperial Cathedral. There in front of the open church door the Archduke was united with the promised bride by the aforesaid Bishop in canonical robes. The trumpeters blew a joyous blast and vespers were said. The upper church in which stood all the princely wedding guests, was hung with golden ornaments and the whole building with beauteous Dutch tapestries. Hereafter, the sixteen royal wedding guests partook of the evening meal at a table in the golden room. The counts, squires and noblemen, and all the Court and ordinary attendants were served in the inns.
    After the feast, followed dances which were first led by the Archduke Ferdinand, then by the Imperial Envoy and so on according to precedence. Archduke Carl and the Prince of Mantua led the bride as ushers. His Serene Highness and both Margraves danced ahead with torches in their hands. On the15th day of May an elegant and princely joust took place in the lists. All the royal personages, with the exception of the Cardinal appeared in brave raiment and broke their spears on a figure in the presentment of a stag. Archduke Ferdinand received the first prize because he broke the most spears. Although Duke Wilhelm of Bavaria had a fall from his horse, it all passed without mishap, thanks be to God.
    On the 16th day of May, there was held a magnificent tourney on foot in which once more the royal personages and others of eminence took part. They brought into the lists a huge Trojan horse and a castle, together with a fortress made of wood; this which they called the town of Louvain, they attacked and stormed.
    On the 17th day of May, there was a splendid chamois hunt above Innsbruck near Zirl on the St. Martin’s Rock to which came all the royal personages. On the same evening there was held in the Court Garden an exceeding fine artificial display of fireworks with the firing of several large pieces and shooting muskets and fire bullets.
    On the 18th day of May, Archduke Carl, the Duke of Bavaria, the Margrave of Baden, the Landgrave of Leuchtenberg, together with their princely spouses, ladies-in-waiting and other members of the Court of Innsbruck went by water on their way to Munich.
    So this princely bridal home-coming and nuptials, thanks be to God, passed in beautiful weather, with goodly peace, unity and concord.
    The old Duchess of Mantua with her son, the Prince, are still in Innsbruck.

50. Festival of the Circumcision in Constantinople
unknown
        August 1582
            background: Festivities in Constantinople on the Circumcision of Mehemed, son of the Sultan Murad.
    The festivities were fixed for the 2nd day of June 1582, on which day the ceremony in Seraglio which had lasted eight days, came to an end. There the gifts of the Sultanas and other great ladies of the kingdom were presented to the Prince. These gifts consisted of horses, richly-adorned slaves, jewels, garments, and such like. In addition to this, fireworks were burnt day and night for a whole week.
    On the day named, the 2nd day of June, at the Sultan’s command, there assembled in the great Hippodrome all the Pashas, Viziers and the Beglerbeghs of Greece and Anatolia, the Aga of the Janissaries, the Capudan Pasha and other great men of the Realm, together with all the Janissaries. The wax torches destined for the ceremony were about two and a half yards in height and of most unusual thickness. These torches were richly decorated with flowers, gold and silver, and are therefore very heavy. From the Hippodrome the whole gathering proceeded to the Sultan’s Palace. First strode the Khan and other great personages of the Sublime Porte in robes richly embroidered in gold. Then there appeared Mehemed, the son of the great Sultan, on a horse beautifully caparisoned with jewels. The head harness was set with diamonds and a double row of pearls of immense value.
    The youth, who was about sixteen years old, was clad in a richly embroidered coat of green satin. He has an elongated face, pale of colour, his eyes are black and have a serious expression. He greeted the people with lofty gesture. Behind the Prince came six horses, led with halters, with silken saddle clothes, richly embroidered with gold. The ceremonial procession arrived in the Seraglio about the hour of midday. There in accordance with the customs of the country, was made loudly resounding music, on kettledrums, trumpets and other instruments. Then the actual festivities began. There appeared one hundred men with staves, at the end of which were bladders filled with air. They were led by a man who rode a small donkey. With these bladders they struck at the inquisitive assembly in order to drive them off. Then came one hundred Janissaries who had been chosen to guard the seats in the Hippodrome which were destined for the foreign ambassadors. On the first day of the festivities, tight-rope dancers showed their tricks, which they performed with quite amazing skill. Others, again, turned somersaults, which it is impossible either to comprehend or to describe. Also several very skilled spear throwers exhibited their accomplishments for admiration. At night fall an illumination was arranged and this lasted until morning. Four castles filled with fireworks were lighted on the square of the Hippodrome and presented a truly entertaining sight. On the second day there were shown some other clever feats by the tight-rope dancers. There appeared among others a man who allowed a heavy block of marble, on which six men rained blows with hammers, to be placed across his naked belly. Another climbed a very high column placed on a pyramid and performed daring tricks thereon. This man was granted his freedom by His Majesty, and received moreover a gold embroidered robe and a gift of twenty piastres daily for his lifetime. Other jugglers allowed horseshoes to be nailed to their heads. On this day began also the presentation of the gifts from the Great of the Realm and the foreign Ambassadors, which continued day by day. particularly to be mentioned is the Persian Ambassador, who altogether made a brave show. He had arrived with a retinue of two hundred sumptuously clad fellows and witnessed the display in the circus from a box which had been specially erected for him. From behind the grille on their stand, the Chief Sultanas were also able to enjoy the spectacle. In the evening two wooden castled filled with fireworks were set ablaze.
    On the third day various artificially prepared objects were exhibited, among them about three hundred large figures of animals, made of sugar. This lasted until midday, thereafter gifts were presented to all the Ambassadors who had been invited by His Majesty. The Hippodrome was sprinkled by twenty water waggons. A juggler performed there, he hit himself in the face with a stone with all his strength without any harm resulting therefrom. Another executed bold somersaults and was masked. Both were presented with gifts from His Majesty. The Sultan ordered seven thousand flat cakes made out of cooked rice to be brought, also six thousand large loaves of bread and great quantities of mutton. When all this was spread upon the ground, all the poor came rushing in the greatest haste to get hold of the food, and this proved a very entertaining sight. Thereafter was held a hunt of Hungarian boars. In the evening there were once more illuminations and fireworks.
    On the fourth day, other jugglers disported themselves on the aforementioned pyramid on which they performed tricks. On this day the different craftsmen paid homage to the Sultan, among them the weavers of golden shawls worn by the women here on their heads. Then followed three hundred youths from twelve to sixteen in age, in robes worked with gold, who sang songs in praise of the Sultan and his son. This performance pleased the Sultan so much that he gave them a bag with one thousand sequins and ordered them to come to him again the next day. Then there was shown in the Hippodrome a carriage which moved by itself, whilst another to which there were harnessed a horse and a donkey, went up in the air on a tight rope. After this once more gifts of great value were presented. In the evening there took place a feeding of the populace, and four thousand rice cakes, six thousand loaves of bread, and twenty roasted oxen were served on large tables.
    On the fifth day the workers of the Arsenal were entertained. They were given six hundred oxen, a thousand sheep and an immense amount of rice soup. Each worker loaded himself with his potions and betook himself home with it. In the evening there took place the feeding of the populace with bread, mutton and rice. Then came yet another boar hunt and finally illuminations and fireworks.
    On the sixth day there were only entertainments for the people, illuminations and fireworks.
    On the seventh day five thousand Janissaries were regaled in the Hippodrome, together with their Aga. They ate off carpets in six great large galley tents. In the evening there was a feeding of the people and fireworks.
    On the eighth day there were games in the Hippodrome with monkeys, cats, pigs, goats, and such like animals, who performed wondrous tricks. Then came sixty riders in sumptuously ornamented yellow satin robes with breast-plates and morions, who held combat with a hundred and fifty richly attired foot soldiers armed with staves. Then two wooden castles were brought in, in one of which were Christian slaves, who were armed with arquebuses and morions. They also had drums, such as we use. These two castles were stormed the while numerous shots were fired. After this there was a combat between Turkish and Persian warriors and at the finish many riders were thrown out of the saddle with halberd strokes. The Emperor and Ali Pasha were pleased with this spectacle. In the evening the populace was fed again and fireworks were burned.
    On the ninth day the Venetian Ambassador handed over to the Grand Seignior a hundred and fifty gifts from the Venetian Rulers. Among them were four gold embroidered robes and many silken ones. A race with riderless horses was arranged. A juggler danced on a very high platform. He fell from it and was killed. Then a Fox, boar and hare hunt took place. In the evening the people again received victuals and splendid fireworks were burnt which lasted until daylight. The earlier displays were shorter.
    On the tenth day four thousand Spahis with their Aga were entertained. Everything proceeded as at the feast given to the Janissaries, and the Spahis made music. In the evening: feasting of the populace and fireworks.
    On the eleventh day came all their singers, who may be described as mad. They ranged themselves in the market place where the Sultan was, and it was said that they were praying to God for the life of the Sultan. But their method of praying is peculiar and laughable. In the evening fireworks. On this day was seen in the Hippodrome a circus rider, who stood on a horse that was in full gallop. He also sprang from the ground to the galloping horse with great skill. Then the horse stood still and the man sprang on to its back and remained standing there. The horse stood as motionless as though carved in wood. In the evening there was again food for the populace, likewise fireworks. Many loaves of bread were flung among the people from the windows of the palace. The Sultan’s son threw sequins, aspri, and other coins, six thousand sequins’ worth in all, from a window and sixty silver dishes besides. Until 4 o’clock of the morning gorgeous fireworks were burned.
    On the twelfth day the Grand Master of the Artillery was entertained with three thousand gunners. This was carried out in a way like unto that used for the Janissaries and the Spahis. Then there appeared in the Hippodrome a hundred richly dressed horsemen, who fought in Spanish armour. Later they shot with arrows at a disk fastened to a very high pole. They showed great prowess. In the evening the populace was regaled and two galleys and three castles which had been filled with fireworks were burned.
    On the thirteenth day one hundred and seventy richly robed men of the Spinners’ Guild rendered homage to the Sultan. Then fifty mounted archers gave an exhibition. After the feeding of the populace an artificial mountain, erected by the slaves of the Capudan Pasha, in which fireworks were hidden, was set alight. This was not successful. On the other hand, other pieces, such as a giant dressed as a Jew, a dragon, four castles and a ruin made a pleasing spectacle.
    On the fifteenth day their Capudan Pasha was entertained with eight thousand of his sailors.
    On the fixteenth day the guilds paid homage to the Grand Seignior. In the evening there were fireworks and a meal for the populace.
    On the seventeenth day four thousand shield bearers and their Pashas were entertained.
    In the Hippodrome, the Greeks held a peculiar vaulting contest. In the evening six thousand sequins and silver coins were thrown among the populace.
    On the eighteenth day the fruit sellers brought magnificent offerings of fruit to the Sultan.
    On the nineteenth day there came all the Christians of the town of Pera. There were about two hundred and fifty of them and each one was more handsomely attired than the other. They wore robes of cloth with black velvet caps, and were richly adorned with jewels of great price. First came one hundred exquisitely dressed men with glittering spears on their shoulders. Then followed the remaining Periotes and twelve youths who executed dances to the accompaniment of loud music. His Majesty sent them embroidered kerchiefs and four thousand aspri. Then one hundred and fifty armourers did homage, followed by the goldsmiths, then one hundred and fifty cutlers and two hundred tinsmiths. And then followed one after another various guilds of the town with their beautiful and rare handiwork. The master remembered them all with presents of gold. As the populace was being fed that day, the onrush of the poor was so great that more than a half of the food was mangled, and the rest so badly spoiled that not even the dogs would touch it. Nevertheless His Majesty had it proclaimed that he found great pleasure in this, and that the festivities would be prolonged for forty days.
    On the twentieth day the guilds appeared once again. Moreover, there was shown a rare and beautiful animal called a giraffe.
    On the twenty-first day a thousand very rich merchants adorned with immensely valuable jewels did homage to the Grand Seignior.
    On the twenty-second day there were once more circus riders, feasts for the people and fireworks.
    On the twenty-third day I saw a man who stood on his head on the back of a galloping horse.
    On the twenty-fourth day the wrestlers of the Sultan gave a performance. They achieved the most dangerous jumps with surpassing skill. In the evening the Sultan and his son threw fifty silver dishes, eight thousand sequins, aspri, and other coins among the populace. At night fireworks and feeding of the people.
    On the twenty-fifth day there were equestrian tricks. Within a circle of six hundred paces a disc was shot at, and besides this many other warlike riding feats were displayed.
    On the twenty-sixth day a fifteen-year-old stripling gave an exhibition of tight-rope dancing.
    On the twenty-seventh day the Sultan threw six-and-sixty silver dishes and six thousand sequins to the people. The fireworks lasted the whole night.
    On the twenty-eighth day the guilds brought as gifts to the Sultan the most beautiful products of their craft.
    On the twenty-ninth day numerous inhabitants of Zara gave a performance and there was a great feast. In the evening the Sultan threw sixty silver dishes to the populace and likewise eight thousand sequins. The Sultan and his son watched the fireworks until morning.
    On the thirtieth day the guilds once more appeared. In the evening feeding of the populace and fireworks.
    On the thirty-first day two elephants were shown who bowed before His Majesty. Four trained lions were also exhibited.
    On the thirty-second day very costly gifts were presented to the Sultan, who once more threw from a window sixty silver dishes and six thousand sequins to the people.
    On the thirty-third day fifteen guilds brought wonderful gifts for the Sultan.
    On the thirty-fourth day a tight-rope dancer danced with his feet shod, and his coat put on hind part before, so that his arms were crossed and unmoveable.
    On the thirty-fifth day fifty horsemen shot with arrows at a golden apple, which was places on a pole about ten yards high. The victorious marksmen were presented to the Sultan, who gave them gifts. In the evening he threw sixty silver dishes and five thousand sequins among the populace.
    On the thirty-sixth day a man allowed six men to break a great block of stone on his belly without his taking any harm therefrom. Then others threw large stone blocks at a target. Another had a large beam laid across his naked belly and pushed the wood, which six men had pulled along with difficulty away from his belly, without making use of his hands. In the evening the Sultan threw silver dishes and sequins in larger quantities than usual among the people, because on the following night the Vesier Mehemed Pasha performed the circumcision of the Prince. For this service he received from the Grand Seignior ten thousand golden sequins, two large silver dishes, and many gold embroidered garments. Also the other Pashas and Sultanas and the first wife of the Vizier, who is a sister of His Majesty, were liberally presented with gifts.
    On the thirty-seventh day a horse race was arranged.
    On the thirty-eight day fifty horsemen held a tourney.
    On the thirty-ninth day there were performances by Zariotes and by fifty riders clad in yellow satin.
    On the fortieth day there paid homage to the Grand Seignior one thousand Muezzins who made a terrible din with their music. In the evening money was again thrown to the people. At the order of the Sultan the festival was prolonged for a further fourteen days.
    On the forty-first and forty-second days there were banquets for the foreign Ambassadors, rope dancing, equestrian entertainments, feeding of the populace and fireworks.
    On the forty-third day His Majesty went to the baths. He was attended by four Viziers and Mehemed Pasha, who unrobed him. To the latter he presented a dagger set all over with jewels also everything that he wore. His son, whom the Sultan loaded with presents, did likewise.
    On the forty-fourth day there were more festivities but no more great fireworks. From the fortieth day onwards the Ambassadors did not attend the displays, the feeding of the populace was discontinued, and the people began to disperse.
    On the forty-fifth, forty-sixth and forty-seventh days there were tight-rope dancing and fireworks.
    On the forty-eighth day, a tight-rope dancer who carried a man on his back, gave a performance; another man was bound to his legs. The Sultan presented him with a big bag of sequins and a gold embroidered robe. Besides this he assured him of a life-long pension of twenty-five aspri daily, but forbade him in future to risk his life in such a manner.
    On the forty-ninth day, the Zariotes displayed their accomplishments once more.
    On the fiftieth day there were fireworks the whole night long. It was the most beautiful display of all and lasted until the morning.
    On the fifty first day His Majesty returned to the Seraglio of Ibrahim Pasha, and from there to the new Seraglio. And thus ended the festivities.

51. Report from India
        unknown
        unknown
            background: Short report which arrived in a letter of the Governor Tellez of Meneses of March last in the year 1581, via the land route.
    One of the mightiest Kings of Oriental India, a neighbour of Portuguese territory, is anxious to become a Christian, as may be learned from letters which arrived from his lands during two consecutive years. It may be regarded as certain that he will now take this step very shortly.
    The Raschu, a very mighty and powerful King, has appropriated nearly the whole kingdom of Ceylon, and laid siege to it for twenty months with a powerful army. The assistance afforded by the Portuguese cost them near on three times one hundred thousand cross ducats and many warriors. But they finally beat the enemy on the day of our dear Lord, the 17th day of February of the year 1581, and a great number of their best fighters fell. They also took from him the larger part of his cannon and other war equipment.
    The King of Dacha, whose kingdom is situate upon the island of Sumatra, has through good luck and assistance gained so considerably in power and reputation that he made the seas unsafe and hoped without help to usurp the power of India. For several years he pursued this plan and His Majesty had decided to send a powerful Armada from Portugal. But this was rendered unnecessary since our Lord God had ordained that the King of Dacha should leave this world through the portals of death. Thereupon great quarrels broke out there and the Governor of India hopes to be able to wage war on this country, which enterprise he will yet undertake within a year.
    The Hidalcar, King of Balayato and lord of the mainland round the town of Goa, died a short while ago. Such disagreements there were between his Captains that the one throttled the other. Thereupon the lord so ordained it that this kingdom has fallen into the hands of a Moor of royal blood, who was brought up in Goa among the Portuguese and received a yearly allowance from them. He has promised to be a good friend and neighbour and to keep free all the harbours, which bring in yearly eight times a hundred thousand ducats, also to grant considerable privileges. A Captain has sailed along the northern coast with ten ships and has ascertained that at Dabul there is a fort belonging to Hidalcar and many ships. Although the enemy hoped to obtain assistance from his own people on land, the Commander, in spite of resistance, pressed them so hard that he killed most of their fighters and took away ten ships without their getting any help.

52. Arrival of the Indian Fleet in Lisbon
        Lisbon
        30 July 1582
    In Lisbon there has arrived a ship from India of the name of Buen Jesus. She brings five thousand five hundred quintals of pepper, two thousand of cloves, much cinnamon and other spices. She started upon the 23rd day of January and lay thirteen days off the island of St. Helena. From thence she sailed on the 11th day. In India two more ships lay at the loading station, they are said to be bringing about sixteen thousand quintals of pepper, six thousand quintals of cloves and one thousand quintals of cinnamon and other spices. May God grant them safe arrival.

53. Procession in Lisbon
        Lisbon
        3 September 1582
    Yesterday, the 2nd day of the month, the merchants and the plateros held in the new street here a procession with the German merchants. They started from the Church of St. John with the Holy Sacrament and the procession was so stately and magnificent that I have never seen nor shall I see its like elsewhere. The whole Bible from the creation of the world to our Redemption was presented by figures and by living persons clad in rich garments of brocade and silk, most graceful and chaste, accompanied moreover by three triumphal chariots. As I am informed, this has cost over one hundred thousand scudi not counting the jewelry and the ornaments with which all these persons were adorned. Even their shoes are said to be worth an incredible sum; some aver more than a million in gold.
    They made this sumptuous display because His Majesty, with the Empress and the whole Court watched the pageant from their palace: but it rained considerably. Much could be written, but I hope to receive a report on this and to send it on to you. These processions only take place once in several years, and for this reason they are arranged in so splendid a manner. The mouths of the Spanish soldiers watered much for the jewels, and they wish for nothing better than that there should some day come an opportunity for plunder. No one imagined that the Portuguese owned such riches and treasures, nor that they were clever enough to display them in such stately fashion.

54. The Burning of the Exchange in Antwerp
        Antwerp
        26 February 1583
    Upon the evening of the 23rd day, at 9 o’clock, the Exchange here was burnt to the ground. This fire was caused by a brazier, and many of the merchants thus lost all their possessions. Otherwise, thanks to God, no damage was done to any of the other houses.

55. Driving out of Devils in Vienna
        Vienna
        3 September 1583 of the old calendar.
            background: Copy of a letter of the Arbogast Nachtrube.
    The Jesuits here, two weeks ago, in company of the Bishop drove out a devil from a poor maid. Her mother is a witch and lies still in jail. First it was all of no avail, but finally she was given a drink of holy water. She had not long partaken of this before Satan left her.
    As I had completed this letter, there arrives a courier from Constantinople and reports that Herr Frederick Breuner, the Ambassador of His Imperial Majesty, has died there.

56. Arrival of the Indian Gold Fleet
        Madrid
        26 September 1583
    The fleet from Spanish India, praise be to God, arrived upon the 13th day of this month without mishap. It carries a shipment of about fifteen millions.It is said that they unloaded and left a million in Havanna, because the ships were too heavily laden. This is a pretty penny, which will give new life to commerce.

57. The Plague in Prague
        Vienna
        15 October 1583
    Rumour has it that His Imperial Majesty will again shortly come here, because the plague has spread, not only in Prague itself, but also on the outskirts, so that His Majesty knows of no safe place for his Court. The aforementioned contagious disease is on the increase here also, and up to four-and-twenty persons succumb daily of the plague, wherefore amongst other measures it was ordered to close the public baths.
    Concerning the Papal Calendar, practically no one takes any heed of it. Neither has His Majesty decreed that it should be observed, but he has merely announced that this should be done because, in fulfilling the Pope’s injuction and request, His Majesty was but rendering a service unto him.

58. The Murder of William of Orange
        Antwerp
        16 July 1584
    In the evening—the 12th of this month—we received the news, the truth of which was later confirmed, that on the 10th day of this month, the Prince of Orange was murdered in Delft, by a Burgundian, one named Bartholomew Gerard. The latter had on the day previous been dispatched from France as messenger to the Diet, and to the Prince of Orange, to report on the death of the Duke of Alençon. And a quarter of an hour after his arrival, the Prince no longer lived. As I write this, there comes the news that the said Bartholomew Gerard has been tortured at Delft, and has confessed that he was persuaded in Italy by a Jesuit, in the name of the King of Spain, to kill the Prince of Orange. The Jesuit had promised him thirty thousand pounds for the deed. Should he, however, be discovered in the act and lose his life, his friends were to receive the money. Thereupon he was sent by the said Jesuit to Paris to the Ambassador of the King of Spain there, one named Taxis. The latter sent him to the Queen Mother of France, who gave him letters to the Prince of Orange and the Diet in Holland, to announce that her son, the Duke of Alençon, had departed this life. Before he came to Holland, he went to the Prince of Parma, to whom he communicated his plan. Not until after this did he appear before the Prince of Orange.

59. Pomp at the Paris Court
        Paris
        11 January 1585
    Much might be written about the new Court Regulations, but it would please me more could I see something that might prove helpful towards the payment of debts. At the beginning of the new year, the grooms of the chamber, the cooks, doorkeepers, and all the lesser menials have been clad in damask, and a golden chain hung round their necks, even to the ushers. For the Gentlemen of the Council there were manufactured brown velvet robes and mantles trimmed with braid and lined with satin. For the Chancellor there was made a red velvet coat, and peculiar cloaks in velvet for the Secretaries of State. These are kept in a special closet of the palace. There the said gentlemen don them when they go to the Council in the mornings; but they doff these garments after they leave.

60. Nuptials at the Court of Philip II
        Saragossa
        12 March 1585
    Yesterday at 4 o’clock, the Duke of Savoy arrived here. The King rode out beyond the river to meet him and received him in most gracious fashion. He allowed him to make his entry on horseback at his right hand. This the Duke would not have at first, but he was forced to consent for His Majesty so wished it. The Spaniards were not a little astonished at this. To-day at 12 o’clock the Church Ceremony took place, whereafter the King dined in public with the Duke, the bride and the eldest Infanta. This evening a dance will be held, and thereafter the marriage will be consummated. The bride looked on this day mightily morose. I know not, whether perhaps she is dissatisfied with the appearance of the Duke, who is small and ugly. If this be the case, she may, after the dance of this night, conceive a better liking for the bridegroom to-morrow.
    The Duke of Savoy arrived in such state that the inhabitants were astonished thereat. First there came riding in front one hundred postilions, all attired in yellow cloth, then came the aposentadores in beautiful liveries, and then the servants of the postmaster also in livery. Then there rose over two hundred Savoyard followers, clad in yellow velvet. Then with the Duke there came a hundred stately gentlemen and cavaliers, all robed alike in violet coloured velvet. The velvet of the cavaliers was nearly covered with gold and silver lace. Among the many gentlemen of high rank there are the eldest son of the Duke of Nemours from France, stately and opulent marquises, earls and knights, so that the Duke has won a great reputation among Spaniards.
    As this letter has been delayed for a day, there is something else I should like to add that has taken place meanwhile. This is that yesternight we looked on at the dance which lasted until 11 o’clock. What happened later at the consummation of the marriage, the bride will know. To-day neither the bride nor the bridegroom have been seen. On the 21st day of this month a tourney will be held, that we must await, though our stay is burdened with heavy expense. This evening the cavaliers from Arragon will hold a hunt and break lances.
            Saragossa, 18 March
    From my last writings you will know what has happened here. Since then naught of particular interest has come to pass. The Duke of Savoy wished to play the Pelota with the people he had brought with him against the local gentry. But this the King refused to allow. Although there has fallen a fair amount of rain during these days, His Majesty has twice or thrice ridden to various churches. The Gentlemen of the Court, and the grandees, and the arragonesque cavaliers of this town wish to hold jousts on horseback on the coming Thursday. Three or four days later the Castilians want to hold a similar tourney on foot, and a hunt as well.
    The King is to leave here on the 27th or 28th, some say for Barcelona, others for Montserrat in order to pass Holy Week there with the Duke and his retinue. Where and when the Cortes will be held, no one knows for certain. There are so many surmises and opinions that there is nothing to write about.Time will show.

61. The Siege of Antwerp
        Antwerp
        15 March 1585
    On the 12th day of this month the Corporation called together all the guilds and desired that the burghers should advance money in cash for the sustenance of the troops here and should state how much food, wine and beer each company consumes. The money is not to be returned until our river has been freed from the enemy’s occupation and our district is opened up once more. Thereupon they determined to deliberate upon this. With regard to our waterway, it remains as before. Means are lacking for reopening it, although various preparations to free it are being made. This, however, is held by many to be nothing but mockery and procrastination.

62. Death of Pope Gregory XIII
        Venice
        14 April 1585
        background: through the Antwerp courier
    Well born and gracious Sir,
    Up to the evening of the day before yesterday, everything that was needful had been reported to you, but as to-day we have an opportunity to send this to you, we would inform you that His Holiness the Pope died in the Lord, on the 10th day of this month at 12 o’clock. May the Almighty be merciful to his soul. Within the space of ten hours he was first in good health, then ill, then dead, suffocated by a catarrh. Farnese shows no elation and all those who were sick abed were made to rise through this shock. One lays twenty-five percent. on Farnese being chosen Pope, thirteen on Savelli, on Sancto Severina eight, on Fachinetti six, and on Mondovi five. One lays thirty per cent. on the Pope’s election taking place before the last of May.

63. Persecution of the Huguenots in Marseilles
        Marseilles
        16 April 1585
    This town has been in sore tribulation and was to have been plundered on Palm Sunday, moreover the throats of all the Huguenots were to be cut. But from this God Almighty preserved us. The second Consul wished to carry out with the Captain the plan to make themselves masters of the town. They thrust many of the Reformed Religion into prison and gave the people to understand that this was done at the King’s command. Thereby they embittered the commoners and made them rebellious. On the 10th day of this month at 10 o’clock at night the Consul together with the Captain went to the house of General Cabané, who belongs to the Reformed Religion, presented him with a letter in which nothing was written and immediately thereon massacred him in his house. Thereafter they went to other Huguenots, dragged them from their beds and led them out to the Tower of St. Felician. Others they bound by one thigh and dragged alive through the town up a certain mountain. There they inflicted upon them divers stabs and threw them naked into the sea. On this account the most noble houses here have armed themselves and insisted that the Consul should show them the King’s commands in the Town Hall. But he made answer that his instructions were not to be shown to all and sundry. The Captain who was the brother of the aforesaid Cabané was taken prisoner. He himself did kill his brother because Cabané had no children. The Grand Prior from Aix was promptly sent for and arrived in the night with one hundred well-equipped horsemen. He went immediately to the prisons and freed the poor prisoners who fell at his feet and thanked him profusely. Then he examined the imprisoned Consul and the Captain and had them hanged on the gallows at night between the eleventh and twelfth hour. Yesterday their heads were severed from their bodies, but in four pieces and displayed in the streets. The Consul’s head was impaled on a high staff in front of the Porte Royale and that of the Captain in front of his brother’s house.

64. Attempt to Relieve the Besieged of Antwerp
        Cologne
        6 June 1585
    On the 21st day of May in the night those of Antwerp made fast, one to another, sixteen large and small shallow ships, which were equipped with large, strong-wrought grappling irons in front and underneath. These they sent with full sails and with a mighty wind against the rafts in front of the Palisade. They rammed them so hard that all the anchors broke and that the ships, together with the rafts, came near unto the Palisade. There they stopped. Thereupon four other ships, which were loaded with powder, iron chains, large grave-stones, and millstones followed, in order to burst up the Palisade completely. The first of these blew up into the air a short distance from the Palisade, without causing any damage. The second was driven ashore and left lying in the sand. She also blew up but caused much havoc. The third ship came near to the palisade with a strong wind and at full speed. The Spaniards immediately loosened two ships from the Palisade and let her through. She also exploded at pistol range without any harm being done. But the fourth and largest ship on which those of Antwerp had built all their hopes, was boarded by four sailors who were supposed to be willing to sacrifice their lives for the welfare of their King and Country. They, however, threw away the quickmatch, cut down the sails and steered the ship ashore, afterwards unloading her. They took therefrom a hundred small barrels of gunpowder. Of these the Prince of Parma made them a gift, as well as of the ship and all that was therein, together with his commendation. Thereupon the Armada left Holland and Zeeland for the dikes, but upon seeing that the Spaniards were holding them strongly garrisoned, went back below Lillo.

65. A False Don Sebastian
        Lisbon
        15 June 1585
    Upon the 12th day of this month our new self-styled King, Don Sebastian, was brought hither, and yesterday at noon was led through the town riding on a donkey; his right hand was cut off, whereafter he was hanged and quartered. To-day two of his accomplices were hanged. This Don Sebastian has publicly confessed that his name was Matheo Perez, and that he was persuaded to such an action through the tempting of the arch-enemy and by several people. His father and he were stone-masons. His effrontery went so far that he deceived many peasants less than a mile from here, by making them believe that he was Don Sebastian. On Tuesday, he had himself proclaimed King in five places to the ringing of bells, he distributed official posts, killed sundry people and plundered their houses. He collected eight hundred peasants and it was feared that a rebellion might ensue. But three hundred soldiers were promptly dispatched thither, who dispersed the peasants and hanged some of them. Others fled into the mountains. This disturbance was, no doubt, instigated by Don Antonio, who was to have assisted with the fleet, which he had collected in France. Yesterday, a Frenchman carrying letters was taken prisoner. Other peasants will be arrested day by day, and it is imperative that the Portuguese should not be trusted in future.

66. The Taking of Antwerp
        Antwerp
        21 August 1585
    On the 17th day of this month the treaty of the handing over of this city was concluded and on the 20th day of this month it was read and made public. No particular joy nor jubilation on account thereof was manifested by the populace; only the Italians and some Catholics burnt bonfires. The Town Council made but little ado about the reading. Everything is quiet here. The troops display inexpressible home-sickness; the reformed preachers will these days travel by ship to Holland and Zeeland. Nothing has as yet been seen of the waggons with provisions, wine, and beer, which, according to rumour, are said to be in the camp. In the Parma’s camp wine costs half a thaler the pint. According to information given out here, the Prince of Parma is not to enter until the 1st day of September, which is his birthday. It is said that he has kept for this occasion a special favour not included in the treaty, which he will bestow upon the town. It will then be seen with what affection he regards it.

67. Gifts for the Sultan
        Constantinople
        2 October 1585
    List of the gifts with which Ibrahim Pasha honoured the Sultan:
    Sixty boys, among them twenty who perform all manner of tilting on horseback in the Arabian fashion, the others are trained to produce string music and other entertainments.
    Ten eunuchs.
    Three Korans, bound and ornamented in gold.
    A tall, hexagonal desk, in which the Korans are kept, together with a gold embroidered cloth from Mecca.
    Two long velvet coverlets, embroidered with golden characters.
    Seventy pieces of plate, among them ten of gold, set with precious stones, the remainder being of silver.
    Three swords, three morions, three round shields, three pairs of steel gauntlets, all of these covered with gold and set with precious stones.
    A clock in the form of a hemisphere.
    Nine horses, completely and richly caparisoned. The trappings of the first five set with gold and precious stones.
    Nine horses caparisoned in the Persian manner.
    Nine horses with coverings of satin and others in coloured silks.
    Thirty-three with ordinary stable cloths.
    A young elephant.
    A young giraffe.
    Two large silk carpets.
    Two large furs.
    Fourteen chests with all manner of gold pieces and silk materials for clothes.
    Five-and-forty shawls of divers colours.
    Six-and sixty old long gun barrels, and three thousand others, which he has captured from the Druses between Tripoli and Barute.
    Five powder flasks.
    Two dead crocodiles.

68. The Expulsion of the Huguenots
        Paris
        18 October 1585
    The day before yesterday a new edict was proclaimed which threatens all Huguenots in France with pain of death and the loss of their goods and chattels if they do not leave the country within fifteen days. But women and children are allowed to remain until six months have elapsed from the first édit de réunion. This edict is particularly directed against those who are fighting. Their goods will be sold from the very hour it appeared and the proceeds employed for the maintenance of the royal troops.

69. A Sorry Week in Augsburg
        Augsburg
        2 December 1585
    The week just passed has been an unhappy one, for on Monday a carman hanged himself, kneeling. On Tuesday a goldsmith of the name of Ostwald, sprang into the Lech in the Sachsengässlein, wishing to drown himself on account of debts. But his neighbours saved him. On the night of Thursday, a cloth-shearer of the name of Huber who was drunk, fell into the Lech and was drowned. His body was found the next day. On the same day a peasant woman of Pfersen killed a young male child—her own flesh and blood. On Friday a fisherman, who is also a gardener in Pfersen, persuaded his betrothed to accompany him to another village, because there would be holiday there two days running. When she had agreed to this and they were a little way from the town, he stabbed her seven times with a crooked blade and sorely wounded her. As several persons saw this murder from afar and raised a great clamour, the malefactor took flight towards the city. The keeper of the gate caught the miscreant and by order of the authorities he has been thrown into prison. The wounded girl was carried to the Pilgrim’s House, where she yet lies in a hopeless state. Last night a weaver of the town was stabbed to death, on account of which the small gates have remained closed this day. In the past night also, a miller in the upper town threw his wife into the river and tried to drown her. But people came to her assistance.

70. Defeat of the Turks in Persia
        Venice
        20 December 1585
    Now at the close of this letter the Government receives tidings from its Ambassador in Constantinople that the Persian Sophi and his son allowed the Turks to push forward deep into the country as far as Tabriz. When they had arrived there, the father and the son surrounded the Turks and vanquished them, taking prisoner those who were not killed. The General of the Turks, Osman Pasha, together with two of the most distinguished Pashas perished. Of the Turks close on a hundred thousand men were left for dead, also a goodly number of the Persians, for the battled raged two days and three nights. Nevertheless the Persians achieved victory.

71. The Murder of the Signora Accaramboni
        Padua
        22 December 1585
            background: New tidings of a pitiful act of murder at Padua in Italy, a townbelonging to the Venetian rulers.
    The Duke Paolo Giordano Orsini, Duke of Bracciano, scion of one of the noblest Roman families had for wife the sister of the now reigning Grand Duke of Florence, with whom he has as issue of the marriage-bed a young Prince of the name of Giovanni. But as the said Prince had but little sexual intercourse with the former Duchess of Florence, he was induced by fleshly desire to break his marriage vows.
    He conceived a burning passion for the wife of the nephew of the now reigning Pope Sixtus. But she did not wish to turn unfaithful to her husband, and therefore told him that she was married and that no other man should approach her. Thereupon the said Duke forgot himself and had the husband of the lady (the nephew of the Pope) horribly murdered. He then once more approached the widow of the murdered man. But she curtly refused him because he was married and she a widow and not wishful to do such a thing. Thereupon the Prince Paolo Giordano forgot himself still further and had his own spouse, sister of the present Duke of France, put out of the way, in order to still his concupiscence for the above-named widow. Then, for the third time he paid his addresses to her. This time she made subjection to him but only on condition that he married her, which he did.
    Meanwhile the Cardinal, the present Pope, did not rest in his desire to avenge the innocent blood of his nephew. But as he was not of much consideration, he has been placated. However, when he became Pope, the Duke wished to be reconciled with him. He knelt before him and begged for his blessing. Thereupon the Pope said: “Duke Paolo Giordano, you insulted the Cardinal Montalto; but Pope Sixtus pardons you. Do not come again, however, of that we warn you." The Duke was greatly alarmed at this speech and removed himself with his spouse to Padua, in Venetian territory, where he kept Court and had up to five hundred persons at his board. Nevertheless, before two months had passed, he died at Salo. Foul play was suspected. He left his spouse, who belonged to the noble Roman house of Accaramboni, a large property. The Grand Duke of Florence was by no means pleased with this testament, and took charge of the young forsaken Prince Giovanni, calling upon the widow at the same time to put aside the will. Should she marry again, he would deal handsomely by her; but he urged upon her to enter a convent or to remain a widow. Then also would he make handsome provision for her. But to this she would not agree, and wished to abide by the testament and to keep a retinue of one hundred persons. On the 22nd day of this month, at 2 o’clock at night, according to Italian time, her palace in Padua was found open. Fifty well-armed men thereupon entered and cruelly shot the brother of the Signora Accaramboni, a certain Duke Flaminio; as to the lady, they stabbed her where they found her at prayer. Although she pitifully entreated that she might be permitted first to conclude her orisons, the murderers fulfilled their deed. The most distinguished among them is Ludovico Orsini, the first chief of the Government here, cousin of the dead Paolo Giordano. Therefore he entrenched himself with his assassins in his house. In the meanwhile the news was brought here and the Government has dispatched one of its Senators to Padua with authority to destroy the house of Orsini and to take the murderers alive or dead. The said Orsini surrendered himself with a dagger in his hand, and his house was fired upon from several large cannon. Thereby a number of his retainers perished, the remainder being taken prisoner.
            Venice, 27 December 1585
    Yesterday the Government here decided that the Colonel Ludovico Orsini was to be strangled three hours after the delivery of their letter. His accomplices were to be dealt with according to their deserts. Without doubt they will be hanged and quartered.
    The chief culprit Orsini confessed that he had perpetrated this murderous deed at the command of great personages. The students in Padua have armed themselves and cried out “Justice, Justice!”
            Venice, 1 January 1586
    It has been recently reported that the Colonel of this Government, Ludovico Orsini, acted murderously and with his own hand slew in gruesome fashion the wife of the late Prince Paolo Giordano, Duke of Bracciano, and her brother, Duke Flaminio.
    When the decision that he must die within three hours was made known to Ludovico Orsini, he confessed that although his years numbered but four-and-thirty, he had put to death with his own hands forty persons, believing that Justice would never lay hands upon him because he belonged to so illustrious a house. He had hoped likewise that he would not be publicly executed. But when he was informed that he was not to be strangled in a public place but in a chamber, he gave thanks for this judgment and penned two letters, one to his spouse and the other to the Government here. He commended to the latter’s care his spouse and child, as well as his estate, so that they might not suffer on his account. He also made a will by which be bequeathed to the Government his armour, worth over and above six thousand crowns. The remainder of his property he left to his wife, who was at the time with child.
    He gave fifty crowns to his executioner, in order that he might be dispatched quickly.
    The brother of this Ludovico Orsini, Don Latino Orsini, is Governor of Candia under the Venetian rule. But shortly afterwards the Government sent a frigate to divest him of the command because they no longer put faith in him. And just as high as the house of Orsini had stood in esteem, as deep is now its fall.
    After Ludovico Orsini had been strangled, his body was borne to the cathedral, the coffin decorated with tapestries and left lying there through the whole of this the 27th day of December. Then it was brought hither and interred in the Church of the Madonna dell’ Orto, where Don Giordano and Don Valerio Orsini, the forbears of Ludovico, also lie buried.
    The murdered Signora Accaramboni was a woman of great eloquence for as Ludovico Orsini was about to murder her, she was at prayer, and when the murderer said to her:
    “Do you recognize me?” she made answer “Yea, now it is time to prepare my soul. I beg of you by the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, to let me make my confession and then do with me as you please." “Nay,” answered the enemy, “now is not the time for confession.”
    In Padua near on six hundred burghers paraded in arms and cried “Justice, Justice!”  Now follows the list of those who were publicly executed: Count Paganello Ubaldi and Captain Splandiano da Fermo. These two were the servants of the urdered lady, who did open her dwelling—the palace—and who were accomplices in the bloody deed. They were riven asunder with red-hot tongs, and killed with a hammer and then quartered. Buglion and Furio Savognano, two noblemen and secret advisers of Ludovico Orsini have been secretly strangled.
    Agrippa Tartaro de Monte Falco, the Comte de Camerion and thirteen more, some of them nobles, others arrant scoundrels, were all hanged.
    Colonel Lorenzo Nobile del Borgo, Liverotto, and da Fermo were torn to pieces by the mob as they were firing upon the house. Twenty of the people lie imprisoned. they also will probably be hanged.

72. The Plundering of Santo Domingo
unknown
        11 January 1586
        background: Report of the capture and pillage of Santo Domingo on the island of Spagnola by the English pirate Francis Drake; this report was forwarded to the Royal Council for India.
    On the 11th day of January of this year, a mighty Armada, belonging to the Queen of England was to be seen lying before this town and harbour, composed of thirty large and seventeen small ships, which had already been sighted from afar on the previous day towards noon. Their Commander was Francis Drake. The fleet took its course to the south. Thereupon there arose much disquiet in the town, and forthwith the President and the Councillors foregathered with the burghers and the citizens, in great concern, in order to decide upon measures for self-defence. These they have taken on the coast at the place where a landing of the enemy was to be feared. They sank many barrels filled with sand into the river and behind them ranged four hundred men so that they could shoot at the enemy with their muskets. On land they erected earth works. They supplied the first with a parapet and cannon. In Cabia, half a mile from the town, troops were stationed in order that they should keep watch and check the enemy, should this become necessary. The President and the Councillors also called together the most experienced burghers, to ask them whether in their opinion the enemy could land at any other spot and do damage.
    They were assured with one accord that, with the exception of Cabia, there was no landing-place on the whole coast. As now there was no longer fear on that score, all resistance was directed towards the river, as many mighty ships had been seen sailing towards it. Besides those mentioned heretofore, three others came quite near, seeking a favourable opportunity of attack. Meanwhile the other ships sailed hither and thither, keeping them selves well out of range of the cannon shot from the fort. They were recognized as enemies and fired upon, but the powder was worthless and the projectiles failed to reach them. It can be imagined that disquiet arose through the menace of the enemy. The authorities rested not a moment throughout the night, but were continually on the alert, so as to keep all in good order. They noticed that the populace had begun to leave the town, in order to flee from the designs and wrath of the enemy, and to save their wives, children and goods. This they did, although it was forbidden on pain of death. Thereupon came the news that a great number of the enemy were approaching the town, and were about half a mile from it. They had landed three miles from here at a place where to do so was thought to be quite impossible. All in all there were only about one hundred and twenty men on horse and on foot left to take into battle, in order to make as good a stand as possible against the enemy. The chief Captain of this handful were: the Licentiate Juan Fernandes de Mercado, the Licentiate Balthasar de Villa Fane, the local Auditor of the Royal Council and with them was the Fiscal Licentiate Aliago. The President, as General, accompanied by these gentlemen, and also the Licentiate Arero, who belonged to the Council, marched out at the head of the above-mentioned troop. They went close on quarter of a mile to meet the enemy. The President and also the other gentlemen were on horseback, armed with spears and shields, with them was also Don Diego Orsinio, the Captain of the galley, which His Majesty had here. This galley at the time was on shore for repairs, so that she was useless. As they drew near to the enemy, the President and his horse sank into the bog, so that steed and man were covered with mud, in full view of the troops. This was held to be of ill-omen. Thereupon the President betook himself back to his dwelling. He was urged to do this, for owing to his age and infirmities his ability to wage war had departed. He was accompanied by the venerable Licentiate Arero. The remainder of those heretofore mentioned took the leadership and are highly to be honoured for their bravery and stout-heatedness. They are worthy of great favours to be bestowed upon them by His Majesty. All the more so if victory had been granted to our side. With courageous spirit they offered their lives to the enemy although they were well aware of his great strength, nigh on seven hundred.
    These were well armed. They were mostly musketeers, archers, and arquebusiers, also spearmen and halberdiers. Furthermore, there were another six thousand men in the ships. The enemy had divided into three groups and waited for our troops. But when the latter perceived the power and strength of their opponents they were filled with fear. Therefore the Licentiate Balthasar, who showed a brave spirit during this expedition and wished to do credit to his office, gave the soldiers a Christian admonition, exhorted them to be brave and stout of heart, challenged them to the fray and approached the enemy within bullet range.
    The Licentiate Mercado also showed that his spirit was no whit less ardent or brave. These two and others of the nobility took up front positions and went into danger in order to induce the rest to follow them, but instead of so doing they broke into flight, heedless of all admonitions and penalties with which the Licentiate Balthasar was threatening them. He called out to them to turn back and to attack and face at least two discharges of bullets, taking no heed of who fell. He wished that God and the whole world should see that they had done their duty. But this was of no avail and they all retreated. The nobles and the Councillos remained behind exposed to all the danger of the shots which were fired from the ships, whose prows were directed against the rear-guard. They re-entered the town through the Gate of Zemba, through which they had passed out. From there they fired three cannon at the enemy and laid low two or three of their men. Now that there was no longer any resistance, the town and harbour were given over to the enemy, who took possession thereof. The fort, too, had no chance of defending itself. They plundered the town from one end to another and took all the private property including that of the nobility, in order to avoid giving cause for offence to the ordinary citizens. The Licentiate Villa Fane is worthy of great compassion, for nothing remained to him. When he was told that he ought to save his belongings as the others had done, he refused to do this, and said that as his property remained here, here would he also die.
    Then the enemy set fire to the town. When a goodly portion of it was burnt, a remedy was found to save at least the churches and what remained. Five-and-twenty thousand thalers were then given to the enemy. When they had received this sum they withdrew on the 10th day this month of February after they had been five weeks in the town, which they left without guns and defenceless. Those galleys and ships which they did not take with them, they burned. Their vessels were loaded with the bells from all the churches and cloisters. Of these have been destroyed and burned: St. Domingo, St. Francisco, the Church of the Mother of God, Santa Clara, Regina Angelorum. These are left in such a state that neither monk nor nun can abide in them. Without the grace of God and help and assistance from the King they will not be able to hold this land under discipline. They also so burned the Church of St. Barbara, that it is now a sorry sight. They then destroyed, burnt and barbarously profaned the pictures of God and His saints. Nothing remains but life itself, which has to be spent in great poverty. The distress is great, and the worst of all that the island is in such bad condition that only a very feeble resistance will be offered to enemy ships. The populace is affrighted and in a dangerous temper. Would that His Majesty took pity on us and showed his authority, for it was for his sake in the first place that this new world was discovered. To keep two galleys for the protection of this island is not enough. It has pleased god, our Lord, thus to confuse the enemy’s brains that they did not press further onwards and destroy the land and its inhabitants.
    All this time the Councillors have kept round the town some two hundred men who troubled the enemy by day and night, killing some of their people without loss on our side, and making it impossible for them to press further.
    The enemy brought with them a parson of the Lutheran Faith in order that he should proselytize. When two preaching monks opposed this, they were imprisoned, hanged and died martyrs. Given in Santo Domingo on the 20th day of February 1586.

73. Bad Times in New Spain
        Mexico
        15 March 1586
           background: News-letter.
    Yesterday the ship from New Spain, which left there upon the 1st day of March, arrived here. On the 25th day of February a ship with three hundred men and all manner of munitions sailed for Havana to render assistance. Those who have landed here previously from Havana, report that the country is ruined and that there is no demand for merchandise. They were obliged to take off twenty per cent. and to give long credit for the little that was sold. A ship brings nine hundred arobas of cochineal as counter cargo. Different reports are current about the arrival of the fleet. Some say yea, the others nay. Whether it comes or not, it will bring but little money back, for no one will wish to spend because the goods are worth more in Spain than here. What is sold here will have to be given on credit. He who has sailed for Havana with the said three hundred men, writes that he has learnt for certain that the English pirates have gone to Honduras and there taken possession of the Porto Canaros, which is the most important port there. They have also taken away the ships among which was one containing three hundred loads of cargo. It is held for a certainty that the pirates will also go to Campeche and visit the whole coast. They will also make a stay in order to see whether it is possible to capture the fleet from New Spain. On this account it is feared that it will not be able to venture forth. This is all that is known. It is the most deplorable tidings for commerce that can be imagined. Our Armada, likewise, does not hurry. It is written to us that our Viceroy of Peru lies in Truxillo near unto death.

74. The Spaniards Establish Themselves in the Red Sea
        Constantinople
        15 June 1586
    On the 14th day of this month two galleys arrived here from Alexandria, bringing news that the Armada of the King of Spain of about seventy large and small ships, has arrived from India, through the Persian Gulf, near Aden, a three days’ journey from Suez. They have diligently examined everything there and appear desirous to build a large fortress near Aden, on African soil, and hereby to cut off the Turks from Indian navigation.

75. The Plague in Constantinople
        Constantinople
        25 June 1586
    The plague has—said to relate—broken out again so severely that already about one hundred persons have perished in the Seraglio of the Ibrahim Vesier Pasha. Also it has made so grievous a beginning in all the out-lying places that it is feared—which God forbid—that a far more serious pestilence is in store than that of the year 1584. All flee from the town. The Sultan has had a place of refuge erected for him on the Black Sea, whither he will repair in about eight or ten days with his whole family. I am again hiring the garden in Asia, above Scutari, which I had in the year 1584, and am ready on the day after to-morrow to travel there again by the grace of God with those of my family whom He has spared to me and who at this moment are all cheerful and healthy. I shall thus protect myself as far as is possible with God’s help from the infection and evil air.

76. Proceedings against Count Kinsky
        Prague
        23 December 1586
    Here everything is as of old, except that Herr Kinsky had to appear on the 18th day of December in the Diet before His Imperial Majesty and his officers, in order to crave publicly His Imperial Majesty’s grace and pardon. It took place in this manner. His Imperial Majesty came out of his chamber, seated himself in the royal chair and ordered the officers to take their places also. Then Herr Kinsky stepped to the barrier and spoke more or less as follows: He begged His Imperial Majesty, as his most gracious King and Lord, through his Imperial mercy to withdraw the proceedings against him. If he had sinned against His Imperial majesty, would His Majesty assign it more to his imprudence than to any intention to detract from the reputation and the augustness of His Majesty. Therefore, he besought His Majesty graciously to pardon him for the love of God.
    When this had taken place, His Majesty called together his Councillors and conveyed the following to Kinsky by Herr von Rosenberg. His Majesty had certainly been willing to allow Justice to take its course, but, as he had so humbly begged His Majesty for mercy and because other petitions had also been presented His Majesty would be merciful to him. The conditions of the pardon should be made known to him. Thereafter Kinsky stepped once more to the barrier, knelt down and repeated the above words. Then the King called to him and extended his hand; with this, the pitiful spectacle came to an end. It was grievous to see such an old man, of so great a merit, and one known and respected in all parts, in such sorry plight. It must indeed have been no small grief to him. May God protect him. I only fear that he may lose his post. In short: it is not wise to joke with the Great, for they have long arms, and one must not open one’s mouth too wide.
    Post scripta: Since writing the above, the conditions for the pardon were made known to Herr Kinsky. He must relinquish of his own accord the office of Burgrave of Karlstein, and the twenty thousand florins which he had with His Majesty are to be forfeit.

77. Sentence of Death against Mary Stuart
unknown
        27 December 1586
    In letters from London it is written that Parliament has condemned the Queen of Scotland to be executed by the sword. But the Queen of England will not suffer this. The King of France has dispatched Monsieur de Belliève to the Queen of England, earnestly to beseech her to spare the life of the Queen of Scotland. How this matter will further develop is awaited with anxiety.

78. A Wedding Feast in Prague
        Prague
        22 January 1587
    A list of all the meat and poultry which were consumed on the occasion of the wedding festivities of His Honour William of Rosenberg held in Prague from the 11th to the 14th day of January anno ’87, during three meals: deer 36, venison 12 tons, boars 36, sucking pigs 9 tons, roes 49, hares 1290, turkeys 27, pheasants 272, partridges 1910, field hares 11,560, Westphalian cocks 50, oxen 75, sheep 764, calves 173, lambs 221, fattened pigs 32, young sows 160, Indian cocks 200, fattened capons 500, fattened hens 5560, young hens 900, fattened geese 1350, eggs 20,620, lard 17 hundredweight, cheese 2 tons. Skate fish 960, char fish in pasties 70, large pike 300, small pike 420, carps 5800, a very large she-pike. Rhine wine 70 pails, Hungarian wine 100 pails, Moravian wine 40 pails, Austrian wine 17 barrels, Bohemian wine 47 barrels, sweet wine 10 kegs, pale ale 150 barrels, Rakonitz beer 8 barrels, barley beer 18 barrels.
    Spices, marzipan and sweetmeats, wheat for rolls and corn for rye bread—a goodly amount.
    In all estates, towns and villages, a goodly number of poor people were likewise fed and it is not yet known how much has been consumed.

79. Execution of Mary Stuart
unknown
        18 February 1587
            background: Exhaustive report of the way in which Queen Mary Stuart of Scotland and Douairière of France was beheaded on the 18 February of the new calendar, in the castle of Fotheringhay in England.
    After there had been revealed to the Queen of England, Elizabeth, several plots, hatched at the instigation of the Pope and the heads of the neighbouring states, enemies of the Crown of England, the said Queen found that she had not only to fear for her throne, but also for her life. She then realized that their aim was to release the Queen Mary of Scotland from her durance and to establish her as the next heir, although she was a Catholic and had been detained in prison in England for many years. In this prison she was persecuted for a long time by the parliament and the States of the Scottish Kingdom, in order that she might be condemned to death, for she had murdered a king, and had set fire to a house with gunpowder, because she was in love with Bothwell, a Scottish baron. Thereupon she abdicated in favour of her son James, the present King of Scotland. But when she again escaped from prison, she assembled troops, so as to rob the said son of his crown. However she was put to flight and returned again to England. In spite of these charges Queen Elizabeth yet desired to spare her life, not wishing to be her judge, on account of her being such a near blood relation.
    But as the Scottish Queen now presumed to covet the Crown of England, the English Queen could not let her go free and scathless, because her life, her country and religion were imperilled. Also she did not wish to create any suspicion in the minds of the Scots. Although the Scottish Queen was kept in such lax and pleasurable confinement that she could even go hunting and enjoy all the pleasures of the chase, she, nevertheless, did not rest content with the pastimes that were allowed to her. She tried many and various devices to become free again, namely through encompassing the death of the Queen of England. to this end she enticed many persons of the nobility, among them the Duke of Norfolk, as well as other earls and gentlemen, so that the Queen of England was to have lost her life at her Court in the previous summer. On that account the above-named lords met a miserable end. Also England was to have been attacked by foreign troops, the Scottish Queen set upon the thrones of Scotland and England, and the Romish faith established in both kingdoms. All of this the Queen of England gathered from various informants, and the Queen of Scotland was proved guilty in the presence of the nobility, the knighthood and the officials.
    It was discussed in parliament and by the States, how the person of the Queen and the religion of the country could be guarded in future against such dangers. As, however, the Scottish Queen was a close blood relation, her life was to be spared. Since also she was not in the free enjoyment of her liberty and rights, a sentence of death would make a rare and amazing departure.
    Thereupon Parliament decided thus:--the life of the Scottish Queen would mean the death of the English Queen and the ruin and destruction of England and of her religion. Therefore it is admitted that she, the Scottish Queen, has to be put to death. Shortly thereafter, a conspiracy was discovered against the person of Her Majesty, wherein her ambassador and others of her retinue were involved. Thereupon, latterly, the Queen of England has resolved to abolish the cause of such evil and of the above mentioned danger, although she agreed to the execution with but a heavy heart. She therefore dispatched several persons to carry out the sentence upon the Queen of Scotland. The officials who received this command hastened forward the execution, but this against the repeated injunction of the English Queen. Because of this, the secretary of Her Majesty, Davison, was thrown into the Tower and several others fell into disgrace.
    And the execution therefore took place in this wise:
    At the command of the Queen of England (through the secretary, Beale) the Earls of Shrewsbury and Kent, who were at the time in the neighbourhood of the castle of Fotheringhay, together with other gentlemen, knights and noble persons, with Sir Amias Paulet and Sir Drury, who had order to guard the Queen of Scotland, had on the previous day, namely the 17th day of February, made known to the imprisoned Queen the will of Her Majesty of England. Thereupon she made reply that she was prepared and had long awaited this. She inquired when the execution would take place. Although this was left to her own choice, she asked that it might take place at once, on the very next day, namely on the 18th day of February of the new calendar, on a Wednesday. She besought God’s help thereto. At the same time as this notification there were laid before the Queen various apologies, namely that the kingdom of England and its Queen had been compelled to make such a decision.
    Hence on the 18th day of February, at 7 o’clock of the morning, the aforementioned earls, knights and noblemen forgathered in the castle of Fotheringhay. Two followers were allocated to each knight, but only one to the others present, so that about eighty to a hundred persons entered the castle, beside the guard and the officials of the court.
    There, in the large hall, in front of the fireplace, in which burnt a great fire, a dais had been set up, which was twelve feet wide and eight feet high. It was completely covered with black cloth, and thereon stood a chair with a cushion. As now all was ready, and the gentlemen had collected there between the hours of eight and nine, a message was sent to the imprisoned Queen that the gentlemen had come on the errand of which she had been forewarned in the afternoon of yesterday, and wished to know whether she were ready.
    The messenger, however, found the door of her chamber locked and bolted. All her people were with her in the chamber. When the gentlemen heard this, they sent a messenger once more commanding him to knock at the door, should he not find it open and to deliver the former message.
    But he found the door unlocked. He sent one of the Queen’ servants to her in order to acquaint her with his command. The servant brought answer that the Queen was not yet ready. After half an hour, the gentlemen sent to her once more, and thereto she made answer that she would be ready in half an hour.
    After this time the chief official went to the Queen. He found her on her knees with her ladies-in-waiting, praying, and told her that her time was now come. Thereupon she stood up and said that she was ready. She was led between two men of her retinue into the antechamber. There she found all her people assembled. She exhorted them all to fear God and to live in humility of spirit. She took leave of them all, kissed the women and held out her hand to the men to kiss. She begged them not to grieve on her account but to be of good cheer and to pray for her. Then she was led to the stairway. There all the gentlemen advanced from the hall towards her, and the Earl of Shrewsbury said to the sorrowing Queen: “Madame, we are here to carry out the behest of our most gracious Queen of England, which was communicated unto you yesterday." The warrant and sentence the Earl of Kent held in his hand. The Great Seal of the Crown of England was thereon. Then the Queen replied that she would as lief die as live any longer. As she turned round she perceived her most distinguished servitor, Melville, and said to him: “My faithful servant Melville, though thou art a Protestant and I ca Catholic, there is nevertheless but one Christendom and I am thy Queen, born and anointed, of the lineage of Henry VII. And so I adjure three before God that thou give this command to my son: I beg him to serve God, and the Catholic Church, and to rule and keep his country in peace and to submit (as I have done) to no other Master, although I had the right good will to unite the kingdoms of this island. I renounce this, may he do likewise, and do not let him put overmuch trust in the presumption of the world. Let him trust God and then he will be blessed by Him. Let him speak no evil of the Queen of England, and thou, Melville, art my witness that I die like a true Scotswoman, Frenchwoman and Catholic, which belief has ever been mine." These words and such like did she repeat.
    Thereupon Melville made answer: “Most venerable and most august Princess, as I have been at all times your Majesty’s faithful servant, so will I now with the help of God, faithfully and honestly transmit to the King, your Son, Your Majesty’s words and message.”
    Thereupon she turned to the above-mentioned gentlemen and desired to have her priest with her on the dais, so that he might bear witness for her to the King of France and in other places, that she had died righteously and a good Catholic. To this the gentlemen made reply that it had been ordained otherwise.
    She then demanded that her servants might remain with her. This was refused, in order to curb her impatience and to free her mind from certain superstitions. Nevertheless five of her servants and two tiring-women were permitted to come to her, because she complained that she was being poorly served. She promised that she would cause no hindrance, either by cries or by tears. Further she demanded for her servants and her maids liberty to depart, with good escort, and free of cost to their own countries without let or hindrance. This the gentlemen promised her. Also that they should be permitted to retain everything that the Queen of Scotland had presented to them. But she repeated once more: “I desire that this take place." Thereupon she was led by two servants of the Governor to the dais. There she seated herself upon a chair, for she could stand but with difficulty. The two earls seated themselves beside her. Then the Secretary Beale read the warrant and the sentence of execution in an over loud voice.
    The gown in which the Queen was attired was of exquisite black velvet, which she had likewise worn when she appeared before the gentlemen. In her hand she held a small cross of wood or of ivory with the picture of Christ thereon, and a book. On her neck hung a golden crucifix, and from her girdle a rosary.
    Near her stood a doctor of theology, Dean of Peterborough, who, at the command of the gentlemen spoke words of Christian comfort to her, exhorting her to die as a Christian with a repentant heart. She at once interrupted him and begged him to keep his peace, for she was fully prepared for death. The Dean answered that he had been commanded to speak the truth to her. But she said for the second time: “I will not listen to you, Mr. Dean. You have naught to do with me. You disturb me." Thereupon he was bidden to be silent by the gentlemen.
    The Earl of Kent said to her: “Madame, I am grieved on your account to hear of this superstition from you and to see that which is in your hand." She said it was seemly that she should hold the figure of Christ in her hand thereby to think of Him. Thereupon he answered that she must have Christ in her heart, and further said that though she made demur in paying heed to the mercies vouchsafed to her by God All-Highest, they would nevertheless plead for her with God Almighty, that He would forgive her sins and receive her into His Kingdom. Thereto the Queen made reply: “Pray, then will I also pray." then the aforesaid Doctor fell on his knees on the steps of the dais and read in an over loud voice a fervent and godly prayer for her, most suitable to such an occasion, also for the Queen of England and the welfare of the Kingdom. All those standing round repeated the prayer. But as long as it lasted the Queen was praying in Latin and fairly audibly, holding the crucifix in her hand.
    When this prayer was now ended on both sides, the executioner knelt in front of the Queen. Him she forgave his deed, as also all those who lusted after her blood, or desired her death. She further forgave all and sundry and craved from God that He might also forgive her own trespasses. Thereafter she fell on her knees in ardent supplication and besought the remission of her sins. She said that she trusted to be saved through the death of Christ and His Blood and that she was ready to have her own blood split at His feet, wherefore she held His picture and the crucifix in her hands. Further she prayed for a happy, long and prosperous reign for the Queen of England, for the prosperity of the British Isles, for the afflicted Christian Church and the end of all misery. She also prayed for her son, the King of Scots, for his upright and honourable Government and of his conversion to the Catholic Faith. At the last she prayed that all the saints in heaven might intercede for her on this day, and that God of His great goodness might avert great plagues from this Island, forgive her her sins and receive her soul into His heavenly hand. 
    Thereupon she stood up and prepared herself for death. She doffed her jewels and her gown, with the help of two women. When the executioner wished to assist her, she said to him that it was not her wont to be disrobed in the presence of such a crowd, nor with the help of such hand-maidens. She herself took off her robe and pushed it down as far as the waist. The bodice of the underskirt was cut low and tied together at the back. She hastened to undo this.
    Thereafter she kissed her ladies, commended them to God, and because one of them was weeping too loudly, she said to her: “Have I not told you that you should not weep? Be comforted." To her she gave her hand, and bade her leave the dais. When she was thus prepared, she turned to her servitors, who were kneeling not far off, blessed them and made them all witnesses that she died a Catholic and begged them to pray for her. Afterwards she fell on her knees with great courage, did not change colour, and likewise gave no sign of fear. One of her tirewomen bound a kerchief before her eyes. As she knelt down she repeated the 70th Psalm: “In te, Domine, speravi. . . ." When she had said this to the end, she, full of courage, bent down with her body and laid her head on the block, exclaiming: “In manuas tuas, Domine, commendo spiritum meum." Then one of the executioners held down her hands, and the other cut off her head with two strokes of the chopper. Thus ended her life.
    The executioner took the head and showed it to the people, who cried: “God spare our Queen of England!”
    When the executioner held up the head, it fell in disarray so that it could be seen that her hair was quite grey and had been closely cropped.
    Her raiment and other belongings were by command taken from the executioner, but he was promised their equivalent in money. Everything that had been sprinkled with her blood, also the garments of the executioner and other objects, were promptly taken away and washed. The planks of the dais, the black cloth and all else were thrown into the fire, at once, so that no superstitious practices could be carried on therewith.
    Her body was carried out, embalmed and made ready for burial. Where this will take place is as yet unknown. Her servants and courtiers were instructed to abide there until her remains had been honourably laid to rest. She was four-and-forty years of age, and was the most beautiful princess of her time.
    She had as first spouse, Francis II, King of France, after him Henry Stuart, the son of the Earl of Lennox, her cousin, a truly handsome young man, by whom she had issue James V, King of Scotland. But after she had caused Henry Stuart to be murdered, she took in marriage the Earl of Bothwell, who was imprisoned in Denmark, lost his senses and there died.
    After this execution had taken place, the portals of the castle remained shut, until Henry Talbot, son of the Earl of Shrewsbury, had been dispatched to the English Court. When, the other day, he brought the tidings to London, the citizens of this town lit bonfires on all sides and rang the bells, because they were rid of the danger in which they had lived so long. It looks as if the populace believed that a new era had begun in which they hope that all will remain at peace.
    italics: Described by Emanuel Tomascon, who was present at the happenings. (On the report is a note in old handwriting: From a Calvinist source.)

80. English Attack on Cadiz
        Venice
        22 May 1587
    From Madrid we have a letter of the 5th of this month, which reports from Seville on the 30th day of April, that the English pirate Drake has made an attack on Cadiz with a hundred ships, among which there were said to be five-and-twenty well-armed galleons. In this harbour they defeated the Armada, which numbered two-and twenty ships and galleons. The munitions and other objects they set on fire, because they could not take away the ships with them. The troops that were on the Spanish ships are reported for the greater part to have previously taken cover on land in face of the English Armada. These ships are said to be the artery of the whole Spanish Armada, for it is to be feared that Drake will lie in wait for them. Then there would be no fleet whatever against England on the high seas.

81. Christian prisoners of War in Constantinople
        Constantinople
        5 September 1587
    On the 28th day of August the poor innocent people who were captured near Ofen, arrived here, and on the 10th of this month were led into the public Divan with such triumph, jubilation and uproar that the Turks cannot remember, even in their greatest victories of old, having seen the like, or having heard of such doings from their forebears. As is testified by persons of note, who by ill-fortune have lived through many such occurrences, that never has there been such rejoicing over prisoners. This took place in the following manner: a large number of powerful and imposing Turks, decked out in sumptuous attire rode ahead. Then there were carried past by many Turks all sorts of arms, firearms, double blunderbusses, and such like which had fallen to the enemy through the aforesaid defeat. Then followed eighteen flags, among them one of His Imperial Majesty with a black eagle and the former Austrian arms. Then came the drummers, and behind them one hundred and sixty poor, misfortunate men, mostly Germans, all shackled with long chains. On each chain four or five heads were stuck on spears, often ten of them on a long pole. Of these heads there were said to be more than seventeen hundred. The aforesaid horrible procession was surrounded on all sides by distinguished frontiermen and Turks, and was led before the house of the Imperial Ambassador. There the former blew on tubes and trumpets.
    In the Divan they led the prisoners round several times as a spectacle, in order that the Sultan might behold them from a window. Then they made a pile of the heads, arranged the flags round them and made sport of them. There was such a concourse of people that the like has not been witnessed at the circumcision of the Sultan’s son or at the entry of the Persian Embassy. Then the poor men, although most of them were sorely weak and ill, were taken, according to custom, to the prisons and the galleys.
    It is said the two hundred prisoners were captured near Ofen, of which many died on the way. But the Sultan’s satisfaction with the celebrations and the rejoicing manifested over the Christian prisoners and the severed heads may be measured by the fact that he sent the Pasha of Ofen a sword set with precious stones and a robe of cloth of gold. Many are of the opinion that he will shortly make him a vizier.

82. Judgment on the Witch Walpurga Hausmännin
        Dilligen
        20 September 1587
            background: Confessions of Walpurga Hausmdnnin, formerly licensed midwife at Dillingen, who, for almost thirty years, practised witchcraft  and was in league with the Evil One. She was burnt at the stake at Dillingen on the 20th day of September anno domini 1587.
    The herein mentioned, malefic and miserable woman, Walpurga Hausmännin, now imprisoned and in chains, has, upon kindly questioning and also torture, following on persistent and fully justified accusations, confessed her witchcraft and admitted the following. When one-and-thirty years ago, she had become a widow, she cut corn for Hans Schlumperger, of this place, together with his former servant, Bis im Pfarrhof, by name. Him she enticed with lewd speeches and gestures and they convened that they should, on an appointed night, meet in her, Walpurga’s, dwelling, there to indulge in lustful intercourse. So when Walpurga in expectation of this, sat awaiting him at night in her chamber, meditating upon evil and fleshly thoughts, it was not the said bondsman who appeared unto her, but the Evil One in the latter’s guise and raiment and indulged in fornication with her. Thereupon he presented her with a piece of money, in the semblance of half a thaler, but no one could take it from her, for it was a bad coin and like lead. For this reason she had thrown it away. After the act of fornication she saw and felt the cloven foot of her whoremonger, and that his hand was not natural, but as if made of wood. She was greatly affrighted thereat and called upon the name of Jesus, whereupon the Devil left her and vanished.
    On the ensuing night, the Evil Spirit visited her again in the same shape and whored with her. He made her many promises to help her in her poverty and need, wherefore she surrendered herself to him body and soul. Thereafter the Evil One inflicted upon her a scratch below the left shoulder, demanding that she should sell her soul to him with the blood that had flown therefrom. To this end he gave her a quill and, whereas she could not write, the Evil One guided her hand. She believes that nothing offensive was written, for the Evil One only swept with her hand across the paper. This script the Devil took with him and whenever she piously thought of God Almighty, or wished to go to church, the Devil reminded her of it.
    Further, the above-mentioned Walpurga confesses that she oft and much rode on a pitchfork b night with her paramour, but not far, on account of her duties. At such devilish trysts she met a big man with a grey beard, who sat in a chair, like a great prince and was richly attired. That was the Great Devil to whom she had once more dedicated and promised herself body and soul. Him she worshipped and before him she knelt, and unto him she rendered other such-like honours. But she pretends not to know with what words and in which fashion she prayed. She only knows that once she heedlessly pronounced the name of Jesus. Then the above-mentioned Great Devil struck her in the face and Walpurga had to disown (which is terrible to relate) God in heaven, the Christian name and belief, the blessed Saints and the Holy Sacraments, also to renounce the heavenly hosts and the whole of Christendom. Thereupon the Great Devil baptized her afresh, naming her Höfelin, but her paramour-devil, Federlin.
    At those devilish meetings, she ate, drank and fornicated with her paramour. Because she would not allow him to drag her along everywhere he had beaten her harshly and cruelly. For food she often had a good roast or an innocent child, which was also roasted, or a sucking pig, and red and white wine, but no salt.
    Since her surrender to the Devil, she had seemingly oft received the Blessed Sacrament of the true Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, apparently by the mouth, but had not partaken of it, but (which once more is terrible to relate) had always taken it out of her mouth again and delivered it up to Federlin, her paramour. At their nightly gatherings she had oft with her other playfellows trodden under foot the Holy and Blessed Sacrament and the image of the Holy Cross. The said Walpurga states that during such-like frightful and loathsome blasphemies she at times truly did espy drops of blood upon the said Holy Sacrament, whereat she herself was greatly horrified.
    At the command and threat of her whoremonger she had oft dishonoured the consecrated font, emptied it before her house or even destroyed the same. This she was made to do only a few days before she was cast into prison, when she was in the parish church from which she took a holy water stoup and carried it home. Then her devil paramour arrayed in handsome garments encountered her in the little street between the great cloister and the stable of Martin Müller. He desired to take the holy water stoup out of her hand and forced her to hurl it against the wall. She had also been obliged sorely to dishonour the blessed Mother of God, the Holy Virgin Mary, to spit out in front of her and say: “Shame, thou ugly hussy!”  Her paramour, Federlin, came to her in many divers places in order to fornicate with hr, even in the street by night and while she lay in durance. She confesses, also, that her paramour gave her a slave in a little box with which to injure people and animals, and even the precious fruit of the field.
    He also compelled her to do away with and to kill young infants at birth, even before they had been taken to Holy Baptism. This she did, whenever possible. These as follows:
    1 and 2. About ten years ago, she had rubbed Anna Hämännin, who dwelt not far from Durstigel, with her salve on the occasion of her first childbirth and also otherwise damaged her so that mother and child remained together and died.
    3. Dorothea, the stepdaughter of Christian Wachter, bore her first child ten years before; at its birth she made press on its little brain so that it died. The Devil had specially bidden her destroy the first-born.
    4. Ten years ago she had poisoned with her slave the second child of Anna Kromt, who dwelt by the Altheim Gate, so that it died.
    5. When, four years ago, the organist’s wife was awaiting her confinement, she touched her naked body with her slave whereby the child promptly died and came stillborn.
    6. Ten years ago she destroyed and killed at birth the girl child of the wife of the present tollman.
    7. Twelve years ago she had killed at birth, with her salve and by strangulation, a girl child of the Pallingerin, who dwelt in a little house near the Danube baths.
    8. Three years ago when she was called to a mill to the miller’s wife there she had let the child fall into the water and drown.
    9. Six years ago she was called to Eislingen to a poor woman who dwelt near the church. She killed the child by pressing on it brain at the time of delivery.
    10. Eight or ten years ago she was called to Steinheim to a poor woman who lived on the other side of the river on the left bank. There also she killed the child by a special manipulation.
    11. When six years ago, she partook of food with Magdalena Seilerin, called Kammerschreiberin (wife of the chamber scribe), she had put a salve in her drink, so that she was delivered prematurely. This child she, Walpurga, secretly buried under the doorway of the said wife of the scribe on the pretext that then she would have no other miscarriage. The same she also did with many others. When she was questioned under torture for the reasons of this burial, she admitted that it was done in order to cause disunion between two spouses. This her Devil-Paramour had taught her.
    12. A child of Stoffel Schmidt she had, four years ago, put to death and after dug out of the grave.
    13. and 14. She confessed that, when, eleven years earlier, the spouse of the late Chancellor, Dr. Peuter, lay a long while in travail, she had rubbed a Devil’s salve on the placenta, whereby she became so weak that she had to be given Extreme Unction. Three hours later, mother and child remained together and died.
    15. She had also rubbed a salve on a beautiful son of the late Chancellor, Jacob by name: this child had lovely fair hair and she had given him a hobby-horse so that he might ride on it till he lost his senses. He died likewise.
    16. Eight years ago she gave the rightfully wedded wife of Otto Vischer, when she was big with child, a drink, whereafter the child was born dead.
    17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, and 24. She did slay a child of each of the following: George Gopen, Sybilla Turnerin, the wife of Jäglein, Anna Seirin, Girg Gärtner, Klingler, the coppersmith Simon Leberwurst, the groom Hans Durst.
    25. A child of the Governor here, Wilhelm Schenk von Stauffenberg, named Werner, she had so infected with her salve that he died within three days.
    26 and 27. She had smeared and killed yet two other children of the Governor with her salve.
    28 and 29. She had killed a boy child of both Master Niklas Brügelmaier and publican Kunz.
    30. Three years ago she had sucked out the blood of publican Kunz’s child, a twin, so that it died.
    She confesses likewise, that the blood which she sucked from the child, she had to spit out again before the devil, as he had need of it to concoct a salve. She could work the children no harm if they were protected by holy water. But if she herself gave the child holy water, she was able to do it damage, as she had previously passed water into it.
    31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42 and 43. She confesses that she killed a child of each of the following: Venedigerin, Hefelinin, Landstrasslerin, Fischerin, Eva auf der Bleiche, Weberin, the wife of the town scribe, Kautzin, Mechin, Weinzieherin, Berlerin and Martin Kautzin, but two of the Berlerin.
    Only a short time since she had wished to smear with a salve the small boy of Georg Klinger, but she was encountered by people and was not able to achieve this.
    She also rubbed the wife of the Governor with a salve, but as she wore a neck ornament with blessed medals on it the salve did not work.
    In the foregone winter at eventide she had rubbed the housewife of the town scribe on the arm with her salve, shortly after she suffered great pain and to this day suffers day and night in spite of all the remedies she has tried.
    When eight years ago she was helping Michel Klingler to push a cart, and Klingler wanted to lift the shafts with his head, she touched it with her salve. Since then, Klingler is fading away and death is the only thing before him.
    To the daughter of Hans Striegel, who is now in the little cloister, she gave a drink in her youth, since when she languishes and is in bad health.
    She rubbed with her salve and brought about the death of Lienhart Geilen’s three cows, of Bruchbauer’s horse, two years ago of Max Petzel’s cow, three years ago of Duri Striegel’s cow, two years ago of Hans Striegel’s cow, of the cow of the Governor’s wife, of a cow of Frau Schötterin, and two years ago of a cow of Michel Klingler, on the village green. In short, she confesses that she destroyed a large number of cattle over and above this. A year ago she found bleached linen on the common and rubbed it with her salve, so that the pigs and geese ran over it and perished shortly thereafter. Walpurga confesses further that every year since she has sold herself to the Devil, she has on St. Leonard’s Day exhumed at least one or two innocent children. With her Devil-Paramour and ether play-fellows she has eaten these and used their hair and their little bones for witchcraft.
    She was unable to exhume the other children she had slain at birth, although she attempted it, because they had been baptized before God.
    She had used the said little bones to manufacture hail; this she was wont to do once or twice a year. Once this spring, from Siechenhausen, downwards across the fields. She likewise manufactured hail last Whitsun, and when she and others were accused of having held a witches’ revel, she had actually held one near the upper gate by the garden of Peter Schmidt. At that time her playfellows began to quarrel and struck one another, because some wanted to cause it to hail over Dillingen Meadows, others below it. At last the hail was sent over the marsh towards Weissingen, doing great damage. She admits that she would have caused still more and greater evils and damage if the Almighty had not graciously prevented and turned them away.
    After all this, the Judges and Jury of the Court of this Town of Dillingen, by virtue of the Imperial and Royal Prerogative and Rights of His Right Reverence, Herr Marquard, Bishop of Augsburg, and Provost of the Cathedral, our mot gracious Prince and Lord, at last unanimously gave the verdict that the aforesaid Walpurga Hausmännin be punished and dispatched from life to death by burning at the stake as being a maleficent and well-known witch and sorceress, convicted according to the context of Common Law and the Criminal Code of the Emperor Charles V and the Holy Roman Empire. All her goods and chattels and estate left after her to go to the Treasury of our Most High Prince and Lord. The aforesaid Walpurga to be led, seated on a cart, to which she is tied, to the place of her execution, and her body first to be torn five times with red-hot irons. The first time outside the town hall in the left breast and the right arm, the second time at the lower gate in the right breast, the third time at the mill brook outside the hospital gate in the left arm, the fourth time at the place of execution in the left hand. But since for nineteen years she was a licensed and pledged midwife of the city of Dillingen, yet has acted so vilely, her right hand with which she did such knavish tricks is to be cut off at the place of execution. Neither are her ashes after the burning to remain lying on the ground, but are thereafter to be carried to the nearest flowing water and thrown thereinto. Thus a venerable jury have entrusted the executioner of this city with the actual execution and all connected therewith.

83. The Nun of Lisbon
     unknown
     unknown
        background: Report on the examination of the Mother Prioress of the Cloister of the Annunciation which was held on account of her wounds.
    We, Brother Luis de Granada, Brother Juan de la Curuas, confessors of His Royal Majesty and Masters of Divine Theology, and Brother de Avero, confessor in ordinary to the Mother Prioress of the Convent of the Annunciation, have, in accordance with the command of our worthy General and Brother, Sixto Fabro, betaken ourselves to the said Mother Prioress. We herein faithfully report what we purposed and learned on the 25th of November, the day of the blessed martyr, Saint Catherine. On the said day we went to the convent at 2 o’clock at night and made an unexpected demand for the Mother Prioress to appear at the grating, so that nobody should learn of it, as we were resolved in secret upon this. As we three stood before the grating, Brother Luis de Granada exhorted the Mother Prioress to patience in her grievous trouble and comforted her in her animadversion with the verse from the Psalm: Quoniam probasti nos, Deus. . . . Moreover, he spoke spiritual and kindly words unto her. Then Brother John intimated to her that it was desired that a test should be made of the truth in respect of her wounds, because with or without justice there had arisen doubts as to whether these wounds were real or only feigned. He gave her to reflect with how much less reason the Resurrection of Christ had been put in doubt by the Apostle St. Thomas and how the Master, in spite of this had deemed it right to relieve him of his misgivings.
    To this end the Master had bared His loins, laid his hand therein and also placed his fingers in the holes where had been the nails. Therefore was she also obliged patiently to endure the investigation. In order that she might not refuse, Brother John showed her a script in the hand of the Most Venerable General of the Order and in which he commanded her to do as she would be bidden by the Brothers. To all this the Mother Prioress listened with the patience of a lamb, but when she was told to bare her head and denude her loins and feet, she was deeply outraged. She locked her hands together and raised them and her eyes to heaven. Thus she manifested her horror, but eventually said she would so as she had been ordered. Thereupon she was instructed to call two or three women to the choir and to bid them stay there. Then there promptly appeared three old nuns who opened the wooden grating. The iron grating remained closed, and to this the Priors and the three women betook themselves, so that the Fathers could see everything quite clearly. The three women bared the head of the Prioress, without again cutting away her hair, for it had only been cut a few days previously by order of the Most Venerable General. There we saw quite clearly by the light of a burning taper that she had about nine or ten wounds of a blood-red colour, which were as large as glass buttons. Brother John took a clean kerchief of Dutch linen, laid it on the wounds of the head and commanded the Prioress to don her coiff again and then to return the kerchief to him. When we took leave of her and had made the tests on which we shall report later, she drew out the Dutch kerchief from under her coiff, and there was a small drop of blood thereon. We surely know that this was clean when she laid it upon her head, since Brother John had cut it with his own hand from a bale of linen, never before used. In such wise it was made manifest that the Mother Prioress had these wounds on her head and that real blood was contained therein. This we distinctly saw by the light of a burning wax candle.
    Then the Mother Prioress was ordered to denude her loins, which she did with great modesty and decency. She had shown the left side where was the wound, thus, that one could see the bare flesh and the wound as well. This is about the length of a finger, nearly straight, blood or ruby red, like the nail marks on the hands and feet; it is about the width of a finger and has in the middle a small gap, where the colour is more vivid than in the other places. In the middle, the wound is divided. When Brother John now asked the Mother Prioress whether this division was in the flesh, she declared it to be so. This was all clearly seen by candlelight. Brother John again took a kerchief of Dutch linen and laid it on the wound. The Prioress had said that she did not know whether the five drops of blood would appear this time, since this mostly occurred on Fridays and on no other days, though there had been exceptions. When we wished to take our leave, the Prioress returned the linen to Brother John. There was some blood on it, but not in the form of a cross as was wont to come to pass on Fridays.
    We then bade the Mother Prioress in the name of holy obedience to bare her feet and this she did with the help of the three old women. By the light of the candle we saw clearly and distinctly that above the instep of the right foot she had a wound—not quite round. This was of a beautiful ruby-red, and it showed in the centre the head of a nail. In the sole she had a round wound of similar colour with the black mark of a nail. This was clearly to be seen. Thereupon Brother John demanded that she show him her hand from which, for some days past, blood had issued, when she held the book in her hands, on which a young woman had taken her vows; she put forth her hand and there was to be seen a somewhat raised wound which was redder than the other. It was distinctly to be noticed that she was especially sensitive in this hand. Throughout the whole time of her test, the Prioress conducted herself obediently, patiently and humbly in bearing all that was demanded of her. She was consoled in her trial by the recitation of sacred texts and listened so diligently that twice she was wrapt in ecstasy. Firstly it was impressed upon her that the sufferings of Our Lord Jesus Christ were far greater than those of the two malefactors, for the frailty of the body of Christ, together with other causes, occasioned Him far greater pain than theirs. During this speech she was visited by a shuddering or trembling fit, which lasted a long time until Brother Luis de Granada commanded her in the name of holy obedience to compose herself, which she thereupon did. But when she was again addressed upon spiritual subjects, she fell into a trance, until she was ordered to awaken. Thereupon she was questioned by Brother Luis as to the feelings she had experienced during that time, whether her reason and will had been dead or living. To this she made reply: “Living.”
    Then she was ordered to relate what she had experienced. After some hesitation she rejoined that God had been with her and with Him a feeling of great inner peace. Brother Luis then asked her what her attitude had been when, latterly, she had had to face much tribulation and persecution on account of her miraculous doings. She responded that for her own self it was of no account but that she had only grieved for the conscience of those persons who had spoken evil of her. Brother Luis then asked what consolation the Son of God had vouchsafed to her in her trouble. Thereupon she related how He had twice bestowed on her grace and consolation. On one occasion He had appeared to her before her persecution with a large cross and had asked her whether she could carry it. “With Thy help I can,” she had replied. Thereupon God had laid the cross upon her shoulders, but it had so pressed on her and thus weakened her that for two months she had felt great pain and brokenness. The second time God appeared to her in a most beautiful and radiant form but bleeding heavily from the left side. This had given her great peace and quietude, in spite of those who spoke ill of her. “Learn how to suffer,” God had said to her on that occasion. With this we took leave of the Mother Prioress, who, with great humility, approached the grating and begged that she might be permitted to kiss the hands of Brothers Luis de Granada and Juan.
    Now this is what took place on the following Friday: on this same day the wound at the side opens and blood issues therefrom. We had asked the Mother Prioress at what hour the blood flowed on Fridays and what she felt. She made answer that it begins to flow about ten o’clock. We therefore went on the following Friday about noon, by which time the blood surely flows. We again exhorted the Prioress to have patience, for her native modesty and chastity and her retiring disposition and manner inspired her with horror at having to bare even the smallest portion of her body. As early as 10 o’clock, nay, even before we came to her, she had laid on a double piece of linen, which she took out of her bosom at our arrival and handed to us. We found the drops of blood in two places in the shape of a perfect cross. So that we might also convince ourselves with our own eyes, Brother Luis de Granada commanded her to divest herself of her scapulary in order that her hands might remain free within our sight. She also bared her side and there we beheld in the aforesaid shape the wound, open, which breaks on Fridays so that blood issues therefrom. Brother John pushed her clothing aside a little and put a fourfold cloth on the wound. We thereupon held converse with her for nearly an hour on spiritual matters, and after that time had passed, we commanded her to denude her breast before our eyes. We thereupon removed the cloth and found in its folds the five drops of blood, and other blood issuing from the wound. Thereafter in our presence she cleaned the wound with a small piece of linen, which Brother John took unto himself and retained.
    This all we have seen so clearly that we were mightily amazed and thanked God that with our eyes we should have been permitted to behold so perfect a miracle, which is such a clear witness to the holy suffering and wounds of our Redeemer. this miracle takes place under the following wondrous circumstances, which are reported herewith: Firstly, it happens on a Friday, upon which day Our Lord did suffer, and upon no other day. Secondly, the blood begins to flow about the tenth hour, when our Redeemer was crucified and received the wound. Thirdly, the five drops of blood issue from a wound, which is caused by a lance and has the shape of a cross. There are no more, and no less than five drops of blood, all of the same size, and they are situate at the same distance from each other, as if they had been measured by a compass. And these five drops have already flown for some years. They began to flow on the Holy Day of the Invention of the Cross of the year ’85 and have not ceased to issue forth on each recurring Friday, whether the Prioress be in good health, poorly or sick. It is also marvellous and clearly to be noticed that the wound, from which come these five drops, remains unchanged in this the fifth year. This may well be considered a wonder, for even if the greatest cunning be employed, it would be impossible to have this wound open and closed very Friday without there being any alteration. When one considers all that has been before mentioned, it is meet to see and recognize that this is supernatural and stands far above the possibilities and artfulness of human nature. It is therefore to be taken as a true miracle, which God alone can produce, so as to testify in favour of the divinity of the Cross and the wounds of our Saviour, as the whole faith and the Christian religion are likewise founded on this mystery. Yea, if this had but happened once or twice, it would be enough to confirm us in our belief. The miracle, however, is that it has happened so oft and through so many years. One of the noblest means, which conduce us to the Faith, are the signs and wonders of the Church, in which we believe, without having beheld them. How much more should we praise this miracle, which we have seen with our own eyes and touched with our own hands!
    We deliberated among ourselves as to the purpose Our Lord, the originator of this miracle, could have had in willing it so, that to the wounds on the hands and the feet be added these five drops of blood on the loins. It seemed to us as if this related to the five wounds of our Lord and Redeemer, and that He has thus ordered it in the days when evil reigneth, to awaken men, who sleep. Thus may they be brought to behold those who have suffered because of sin and to consider how great a curse it is. God has desired to confirm the genuineness of the wounds with these five drops of blood. Whereas there have been people deceived by the Devil, who wished to ape the wounds of Christ, our Lord has, with this miracle, confirmed His wounds, so that they can scarce be imitated. This we recorded in writing at the order of our Most Reverend Father and General, Brother Sixto Fabro de Cura, and we have signed it in Lisbon the 4th day of December 1587. Brother Luis de Granada, Brother Juan de la Curuas and Brother Caspar de Avero.
    Now there follows another test, which was undertaken by Brother Luis de Granada and Brother Caspar de Avero, Preacher General, on the 10th day of November 1587, on St. Martin’s eve, in order that the colour of the wounds of the Mother Prioress of the Convent of the Annunciation be tested.
    We, Brother Luis de Granada and Brother Caspar de Avero, are well aware of the guile of certain persons, who have brought forward false witness and maintained that the wounds of the Mother Prioress have been painted with ochre or other colours. We confess that, driven by our zeal and longing to end this public vexation, we have betaken ourselves to the convent, at the order of our Superiors, there to probe the truth of these assertions. We bade the Mother Prioress appear at the window of the Community in the presence of other nuns and have comforted her on account of the false allegations and pointed out to her the example of our Redeemer and other Saints, who also found comfort, and in particular the Holy Catherine of Sienna, who was represented as a woman of false and deceitful holiness. We exhorted her to show patience and told her, that if what we were about to undertake was likely to cause her pain, it was happening to the glory of God and was necessary for the repression of the doings of the evil-minded and the faithless. She passed through all these storms with great patience and humility, nor did she manifest resentment, indignation, or utter any complaint against those who spoke so vilely anent her. She likewise noticed how afflicted and disquieted her nuns showed themselves. As she stretched forth her hands through the said window, she said: “Nunc cognovi quoniam voluisti me, quoniam non gaudebit inimicus meus super me." After these words were spoken, Brother Luis de Granada wetted a kerchief in a vessel filled with water and began to wash the wound therewith and to rub it, which could not come to pass without great pain, for she suffered whenever he came close to the nail. Whilst she was being rubbed very hard on all sides of the wound, and on one spot in particular, and when her dolour became too pressing she sighed, “O Wounds of my Lord Jesus Christ!”  Thereupon we stopped for a while in order that she might rest. But soon after we began again and did this surely three or four times in the hour which we passed with her. The other nuns, who were present, felt great pity with her; they consoled her and exhorted her to be patient, for the sake of the Love, in the name of which all this was happening. As ultimately there was no change either in the water in which the cloth had been wetted or in the colour of the wounds, we gave up tormenting her any further. She suffered so greatly thereby, that for two days she was unable to eat with her hands. This the sisters who tended her can affirm, as will also many other nuns. This is the testimony which we fell compelled to render truthfully according to the order received by us, and we sign this with our names the 10th day of November 1587 in Lisbon.

84. The Great Armada is Made Ready to put to Sea
        Madrid
        18 May 1588
    The last courier from Lisbon brings news of there having arrived a letter from London. Therefrom one learns of the preparations which are being made here. The people are reported to be unwilling to embark, and it is presumed that the Catholics will join forces when the Armada arrives. It is also suspected that various lords will be their leaders.
    There were many women on board the Armada. The Duke ordered the captains to make a list of how many of them each had in his ship, and he requested them to bring the list to him in three or four days. It was found that there were somewhat more than six hundred. They were then not only put ashore again, but also removed from Lisbon. This was done after the soldiery had already come on board the ships. They were far from pleased on this account, but were comforted with the report that there were comely wenches in England.

85. Excommunication of the Queen of England
        Salzburg
        14 July 1588
    There is war against England in the air, and nothing will come of attempts for peace, for His Holiness the Pope has had a Bull read publicly in the Chapel of the Vatican in the presence of my most gracious Lord of Salzburg. Therein the Queen of England is declared to be dispossessed of her kingdom, her lands and her subjects, being long since a condemned heretic. Her subjects, of whatever rank they be, are released from the vow whereby heretofore they had sworn her allegiance.
    The Pope also deprives her of all the titles she had held up to now, divests her of all honours and transfers them all to the King of Spain. On this account the latter is now to declare himself to be rightfully chosen and appointed King of England and Ireland, and Protector of the Catholic Faith in that country. He is to wage war upon the Queen and to endeavour to bring her lands and her people under his sway. His Holiness has publicly proclaimed His Majesty King of Spain, England and Ireland, and will bestow this title upon him for all time, on condition, however, that His Majesty when he obtain possession of these provinces pay tribute to the Holy Roman See with a certain yearly pension as is done on behalf of the Kingdom of Naples.
    In order that His Majesty should be able to do this with the greater ease, His Holiness is granting him a million crowns for his assistance: half of it for the present putting to sea of the Armada, and the other half whenever His Majesty’s forces have set foot in England and captured an important harbour.

86. Mutiny of the Janissaries
        Venice
        22 July 1588
    The latest letters from Constantinople report that the Janissaries there manifested great rebellion on account of a complaint against their Aga. In order that such rebellion should not turn into something worse, the Grand Signior had the said Aga imprisoned in a very deep dungeon and four of his councillors of the highest rank impaled, whereupon he gave the Janissaries a new Aga.

87. A Circus Rider at the Imperial Court
        Prague
        31 August 1588
    A few days ago an Italian showed especial skill before His Imperial Majesty and the Archdukes. First, he shot with a Persian arrow behind and in front of him in full gallop, thereupon he stood in such wise that he put one foot to the ground and then again bestrode his horse. Thirdly, he stood on his saddle in full gallop. Fourthly, he unsheathed and again sheathed a sword in full gallop. Fifthly, when his horse was running fast, he stood with his head upon the saddle and had his feet up in the air. Sixthly, he turned back in his saddle and to the front again in full gallop. Seventhly, he trotted his horse in a circle, stood upright in his saddle and placed a long pole upon his head. This pole he guided with his head and shoulders and brandished like a fencer with his two hands. The horse which he had worked so hard, did not sweat and was to all appearances a Turkish horse. This skill pleased His Majesty and the Archdukes full well, and the rider received a large gift as a reward.

88. Persecution of the Protestants in Salzburg
unknown
        3 September 1588
            background: Copy of the Princely Mandate of Salzburg concerning the exercise of the Religion.
    We, Wolf Dietrich, Archbishop of Salzburg by the Grace of God, Legate of the Holy Roman See, hereby declare and make known: In our Capital of Salzburg, we have found several of our citizens and inhabitants opposed to our old and true Catholic Faith, who after loyal and fatherly exhortation, information and instruction, in spite of the several weeks’ respite granted, have stubbornly persisted in their pre-conceived and antagonistic opinions. On this account we bid them to leave the town and the Archbishopric, for the sake of preventing further trouble and embarrassment. So that they may know how it stands with their real and movable property and their merchandise, we have public announced the following articles:
    Firstly: It is our earnest will that those who leave our town of Salzburg make a statement of all their real estate and property before their departure and omit nothing nor leave it unregistered. This also applies to those who have already left. This statement is to be handed to us in writing. Should any one show disobedience herein or hide anything, his property is to become forfeit to us as fiscal property and subject to our domain. So that those who are no longer here should not remain in ignorance, they are to be advised of this by our Civic Authorities, through their tenants, or their own messengers, otherwise we shall proceed against the recalcitrant with heavy fines.
    Secondly: They are to sell their houses and property, in and around our town, within one month, to such persons as shall find favour in our eyes, or, after this time has lapsed, make them over to them for a reasonable sum until the latter can dispose of them. Since we shall not permit that the houses be closed or that we see bad servants and citizens within them, we shall let such houses and gardens through our Civic Authorities to others for a low rent. For as Prince and Ruler of these lands we are not willing to have our capital stand partly empty, but wish that it should be fully inhabited.
    Thirdly: Those who leave this town for the sake of their faith are not to hold any civic rights or honours in our Archbishopric. They are to be treated here as foreigners and strangers. But if any one of them should again return to the Catholic Faith, and tender the customary allegiance, we will reinstate him fully in all things. In the meantime, however, they are to be allowed to take their goods and chattels through our Archbishopric, unhampered, as do other strangers and foreigners.
    Fourthly: They are not venture to trade in the outer town of Salzburg or any other town in our Archbishopric. But should they resort to smuggling or carry on their calling with their own servants or other citizens and inhabitants of this town in any other name, their wares are to be considered our fiscal property.
    Fifthly: They are to be permitted, as need arises, to travel through our Archbishopric. But the must not cause any offence and must frequent only the open inns. Neither are they allowed to sojourn longer than three days without our Councillor’s knowledge, especially within our town of Salzburg.
    Sixthly: Whatever they have need to transact in our Archbishopric, this may they do, but only through Catholic proxies, and not through sectarian servants.
    Seventhly: Those who hold guardianships and have foster-children are to make over their trust-moneys and render proper account of them. In their place are to be appointed Catholic guardians who will bring up the wards in the Catholic Faith.
    Eighthly: Wards, who are not here, but live in sectarian places are to be cited and brought hither by our Town Council. They are to be sent to strange places only with our foreknowledge.
    Ninthly: All those who have already put their property in order or do not hold any and are ready to depart, are to leave our town of Salzburg and our Archbishopric within fourteen days of this date and see to it that they are not encountered here any more.
    All this is our Will, Wish and Command.
    In true Testimony of this our Mandate we have signed and written it by our own hand.
    Issued in our town of Salzburg on the 3rd day of September in the year 1588 after Christ our Lord and Redeemer’s birth.
                    WOLF DIETRICH m.p.

89. Toleration of Jews in Rome
       Rome
       24 September 1588
    Different Jews from the Levant and other places have appeared here. They are said to have offered much money to the Papal Chamber. It is probable that they may receive privileges in order that they may trade with their merchandise in the Roman State.

90. Return of the Circumnavigator Cavendish
        Mittelburg
        6 October 1588
    Mestre Candis, a nobleman, who on his own venture, had set sail twenty-five months before with two ships and one pinnace, has arrived in England. He sailed round the world along the route of Magellan and robbed, burnt and sank nineteen ships in the Pacific. On land he burnt ten towns and inflicted great damage upon the Spaniards. Among other things he conquered a big galleon which was on her way from China to the Indies or Peru. She was richly laden with silks and other wares. According to the inventory found, her cargo was worth 350,000 ducats. He took what was best, loaded it into his ships, and burnt the rest with the galleon. He returned home by way of the Cape of Good Hope, richer by almost one million. The two hundred men he had with him have all grown wealthy. The English Earl of Cumberland is also said to have the intention of setting out upon such an expedition.

91. Contraband of War
        Antwerp
        12 November 1588
    The Queen of England has requested the Eastern Ports to allow no pitch, resin, masts and other shipbuilding material to go to Spain and Portugal. In case of non-compliance she has decided to confiscate these goods, should they fall into English hands.

92. The End of the “Great Armada”
       Hamburg 
       November 1588
            background: Report from England about the Spanish Armada, received in Augsburg from Hamburg.
    The Armada of the King of Spain set sail from Portugal with one hundred and thirty-five ships to wit: four galleasses from Naples, four galleons from Portugal, ten vessels with victuals, fourteen Venetian ships, among them several galleons. The remainder was made up of other large and small craft. The Armada arrived in Corunna on the 5th day of July, from whence it intended to sail for Flanders,, there to join forces with the Duke of Parma and invade England. At that time the English Armada was in Plymouth Port.
    After they had been under sail from Corunna eight days they arrived in Ostend and thereupon lay south of the shores of England, where for four or five days they had various skirmished with the English Armada. On that occasion the English took two ships. On one of these there was Don Pedro di Mendoza, whom they took prisoner and so to England. Storms south of England caused them the loss of four Portuguese galleons which remained stranded on the French coast. They then proceeded and cast anchor off Calais, since they could no longer get as far as Dunkirk. They wished to wait for the Duke of Parma in Calais, but he sent word that he could not be ready under eight days. Thereupon the admiral sent reply that he would again set sail for Spain. Meanwhile the English sent forth against the Spanish Armada several burning ships, so that they were forced to cut their moorings and to retire hastily. Each ship left two anchors behind and four of the largest galleasses were stranded and wrecked off Calais. The following day at eight o’clock, the two Armadas had a further encounter, heavily bombarding each other for eight hours. In this battle the Spanish lost four ships, namely two Portuguese galleasses, a vessel from Biscay and one other. All four went to the bottom of the sea. Three large Venetian craft remained behind off the coast of Flanders and were in great peril of going under. The inhabitants of Flushing took two of these ships, and the third was shipwrecked. One of them had on board the Colonel commanding the garrison of Seville. According to the prisoners’ report the Spaniards lost four thousand men in the battle off Calais, amongst them the Commander-in-Chief of the cavalry at Naples and Seville. The Spaniards are said to have left one hundred and twenty ships, although others could count only one hundred and ten. The big galleon, which the Duke of Florence had sent, was not to be seen anywhere after the battle.
    Hereafter the Armada made off and was pursued by the English for five days as far as Scotland. When they counted their men there they found that they had already lost eight thousand, most of whom had been killed or died of disease. From thence they set sail for Ireland without taking provisions on board. Off Ireland they lost two ships, the San Sebastian and the San Mathias, which had four hundred and fifty-six men on board. Lacking fresh water, the fleet threw many horses and mules overboard off Ireland. When they sailed away from Ireland, the Commander-in-Chief, the Duke of Medina Sidonia, ordered each one of his captains to set his course for Corunna or the first Spanish port. They thus sailed together throughout ten days. Then the storm separated the Duke of Medina Sidonia with twenty-seven of his ships from them and no one knew where they had gone. The last time the Armada was assembled it counted no more than seventy-eight ships. Of the big galleasses not one was left. Two of the Duke of Medina Sidonia’s ships ran ashore. Only two or three of the men were saved. They say that the Chief Admiral had left on board only five-and-twenty more barrels of wine, but little bread and no water. His masts had been so weakened by firing that he could not carry full canvas. The Duke had three English pilots on board ship. On the 10th day of September a further large ship of five hundred tons, Maria della Rosa, ran ashore off Ireland. On it were the Colonel Michael Oquendo, commander of part of this fleet, and also the Prince of Ascoli, the bastard son of the King of Spain, twenty-eight years of age. There were besides these ten noblemen, seven captains and five hundred soldiers. They all perished excepting one pilot who saved himself on a plank. He says that the King’s bastard son came on board this ship off Calais. The vessel carried fifty cannon and twenty-five other metal pieces, as well as 15,000 ducats and silver reals and much gold. The same day two big vessels put eight hundred and fifty men ashore in Ireland, seven hundred of whom died, and the remainder were taken prisoner. The vessels were cast ashore. On the 12th day of September another big ship was wrecked. Thirteen noblemen were taken prisoner and four hundred men reached land. From yet another ship seventy-eight bodies were washed ashore. From a further wrecked vessel three noblemen, a bishop and seventy-nine mercenaries were taken prisoner. The others perished. On the 17th day of September two large vessels, the St. Joaquim and the St. Martin, sank. The admiral was de Ricaldo, and his ship was almost the largest in the whole fleet. There were on it eight hundred soldiers, sixty Portuguese and forty Biscay fishermen. They had starved for almost four days.
    Finally another galleon of four hundred and fifty tons was wrecked with an Italian margrave and the old Naples and Seville garrison. On it were also Don Alonzo de Layba, Mestre de Campo of the cavalry in Milan. On the 18th day of September there arrived news from Ireland that very many bodies had been washed ashore.

93. Mourning Prohibited in Spain
        Middelburg
        14 November 1588
    It is said that news has arrived from Ireland that a further nine ships of the Spanish Armada have perished there. Sixteen hundred men are reported to be still alive, to whom the Irish are lending help. For that reason the Queen of England has dispatched thither six hundred men who are to take up hostilities against these people. From Sicily there comes information that the General Duke of Medina in Seville organized there a great procession to celebrate his return. Ninety ships of the Armada are missing, and every one has been forbidden to mourn his friends who were lost with the Armada. A forty days’ fast has been ordered, hoping that thereby the return home of the missing ships will be obtained.

94. Letter from the East Indies
        East Indies
        December 1588
            background: Letter from Oriental India, received in Augsburg on the 15 December 1588.
    During the month that has passed the Portuguese dispatched an Armada to the coast of Melindo because the Turks wrought much damage there a year ago. They were also expected this year, but they did not arrive. Since several fortresses there showed favour to the Turk, the Armada burnt three of them down to the ground and killed every one over five years old. One king they decapitated and sent his head here. Other fortresses asked for mercy and made their peace with the captain. When peace had been restored the Armada returned here again. A further Armada was also sent to Malacca in April. There the King of Gior laid siege to the town which had been in great peril. In a month’s time the ships are to return again. Great importance is attached to this town on account of navigation to China, Japan and the Moluccas, for the ships have to put into harbour there. Owing to the fact that the Moluccas are in revolt, two galleons returned from there last year with but a small supply of cloves. A great number of troops are sent to this place, but as the Moors poison them they are mostly buried there. Ceylon has been besieged by land and water for eight months by King Rag. Assistance was dispatched thither in September, but so far not much has been achieved. It is in great danger and daily expects a fleet which is to be sent to them from Goa. May God grant them success, for this country is in great need of this fort because it is the richest island on this coast and all the ships coming from China, Malacca, the Moluccas and Bengal have to put into harbour there. It is rumoured that in the Straits of Moqua there are twelve or more galleys belonging to the Turks, but it is not yet known what it is they want, nor whither they are bound. It is supposed, however, that they are making for the coast of Melinda, to which an Armada is to be sent in January. Along the coast from Dug as far as Cap Camerin there are many other pirates who cause great depredations, take many ships and kill many Portuguese. But it is not possible to put a stop to their doings because of the many other affairs on hand which require attention.

95. A Quack
        Strasburg
        22 December 1588
    Here there is one, Czspar Hartenfels by name, who calls himself Theophrastista. He is accused by our doctors of being a murderer. They produced many witnesses against him. I believe his sojourn here will not be of much longer duration. The town of Nuremberg has also shown him to the gates and sent him about his business. His wife is said to be of good repute and of good service to women in childbed.

96. Peter’s Pence
        Rome
        16 December 1588
    During the last days the Pope has again deposited in the Castello a further sixty thousand gold crowns, so that now there are in all four millions in actual coin.

97. The Murder of the Guises
unknown
        December 1588
            background: How the terrible butchery happened on the 23rd and the 24th days of December 1588.
    On the 15th day of September last King Henri, the third of that name, convened Parliament in France that all the clerical and secular states might meet and take counsel with one another as to the attainment of peace and unity in matters of religion as well as in politics. But the States did not assemble until a good while later, and the Huguenots and the adherents of Navarre found means and ways to prevent this plan of the Catholics. It was their wish that the Pope’s Bull of Excommunication should be put into force from Rome so that he and his successors might never obtain possession of the crown of France. But at this time many events are taking place at Blois. Each faction desires to draw the King over to its side. And the King, finding himself hard pressed by both parties, sanctioned the following terrible murder in order to regain his lost prestige.
    On the 23rd day of September the King invited the Duke of Guise to Blois to discuss and settle with him matters of paramount importance. The latter goes to the King on that very day at eight o’clock in the morning. But as he enters the hall leading to the King’s chamber, there springs upon him from behind the door one who has been hired for this purpose, and inflicts upon him two or three wounds in the back with a dagger. Thereupon several of the King’s halberdiers hasten to the scene to do him to death. This all in the presence of the King. Thereafter the King gave orders for the assassination of the Cardinal de Guise, the brother of the murdered Duke, and for the arrest of other noblemen, and amongst them the provost of the Paris merchants.

98. A Miracle in Weimar
        Weimar
        20 January 1589
    In this town there lives a burgess of the name of Nicolaus Walhelm, a glover. He has a stag’s antler with six points, which had parted company with the stag’s head twenty years before and has lain for almost all of that time in the loft amidst other antlers. This had been given to him as a present and at midday on the 18th day of September of the past year of 1588, he bored a hole through it with a clinching-iron and nailed it up in his room. The same night at eight o’clock the antler on the wall starts to bleed of its own accord from the largest horn. So it continues all night, also the following Thursday throughout the day and the night until Friday at 6 o’clock in the morning. The drops of blood fall on to a wooden seat below, and neither water nor soda can remove the stains from it, for the blood has eaten into it very deeply. In the end, the whole horn bled, and that to such an extent, as could never have happened with an ordinary antler. This has been witnessed with their own eyes by our pastors, as well as by many of the nobility and the citizens, all in all more than four hundred persons. The Government have had the antler removed and the old Duchess commanded the antler to be brought to her, and there it still is. God knows what this portends.

99. Veracious Account of Divers Places of Repute and Importance in Constantinople
unknown
        1589
    There are 4492 large streets in Constantinople, in each of which there are special churches which are called mosques in Turkish. There are 2185 streets without churches. There are likewise 442 churches in the town in which the Christians are allowed to hold their services. There are besides this 100 hospitals, 895 baths, called Hamman in Turkish. Then there are 941 fountains or water troughs, the water of which it is a delight to drink. Not counting the bakeries there are 275 common baking stoves, and then there are 585 corn mills. Fifteen houses cater for the mules of strangers and pilgrims. Then there are also 418 inns for the care of strangers. They have also 115 special big schools where excellent knowledge may be gained in art and languages. Then there are 165 ordinary children’s schools. The town has 24 gates, and the city wall boasts of a height of 360 feet and large turrets. In circumference the city measures eighteen foreign miles, or nearly three German miles.

100. English Raid on Corunna
unknown
        6 May 1589
        background: Copy of a letter by an English Captain to the English Secretary in London anent Drake’s raid on Corunna.
    Through God’s help we arrived in Corunna on the 7th day of April, and the same day we set ashore, about two miles from the town, a number of our soldiery whom we divided into several detachments. They arrived in good battle formation about the distance of a musket shot from the fortress. On the following day at midnight we passed about one hundred pinnaces and barges with soldiery and cannon, between the ships and the fortress, disembarked the soldiery and fired with two big cannon upon the enemy. Soon thereupon the assault was made amid vociferous shouting and terrible firing, so that the enemy forsook their barricades and fled into the mountains. We then kept the enemy busily engaged with much continuous firing and shot down a large portion of the city wall with big cannon. In the harbour we found two galleons, one of them a marvellously big vessel with fifty-two big pieces. We set fire to the vessel, but removed the cannon. We further took a large ship from Biscay of about five hundred tons which was well equipped with copper and iron pieces, also a hulk of three hundred tons, likewise well equipped with pieces, and many more ships besides. Altogether we took from the enemy 140 big cannon. In the town we found in abundance wheat, flour, salted meat, fish, wine, oil, biscuits, powder, lead, anchors, sails, hemp and such-like. All these stores had been deposited here for the provisioning of the Royal Armada which was to have sailed from here on the last day of this month. After that our people devastated the country-side for seven to eight miles around the town. Now and then they came upon a band of Spanish soldiers, in all over two thousand, who, however, took to flight. We hope to God that with His help we shall achieve the same success in other places, so that the Spaniards’ arrogance towards the little island of England may be brought low. The provision and ammunition were of great assistance to us.
    After having learnt during the last days that our enemies, about 8500 strong, had fortified themselves by a bridge some four miles from here, our general went to encounter them in good battle formation. After much skirmishing, he put the enemy to flight, killed four or five hundred of his men and pursued them for half a mile. They left behind them more than three thousand suits of armour and all manner of arms. Our people thus gained possession of a great number of horses and mules, and badly devastated the country-side by fire for eight miles round.

101. The Murder of Henry III
unknown
unknown
            background: Report of the murder of the King of France.
    On the first day of the month of August, a young Dominican friar betook himself to St. Cloud where the late King sojourned, with a passport from the Count de Brienne, who is kept imprisoned in Paris. On his arrival he informed the guard that he had something which he wished to communicate to the King. The King ordered that he might be permitted to deliver his message on the following day. The Provost-Marshal gave the monk quarters at the King’s request and entertained him right nobly. The monk said he was minded to do the King a great service. The following day the Provost-Marshal led the monk to the King’s chamber. But, as there were several persons present, the monk demanded that the King might receive him alone. He led him into his cabinet and read various scripts which the monk handed to him. When the King had perused the last, he asked the monk whether he had any more. The latter thereupon replied “Yes,” and, in place of the script, drew forth from his sleeve a short knife, the width of two fingers, which he thrust into the King’s abdomen below the navel. He left it sticking in the wound. The King pulled it out himself and thus enlarged the wound. He then himself inflicted a stab upon the monk. At his calls for help several people came into the room, among them La Bastida, who helped to murder the late Guise, and he with his dagger slashed at the monk. Also one of the halberdiers thrust has halberd into the monk so that he was mortally wounded. He said that he had not hoped to come off so easily. After his death his corpse was dragged along the streets, sent asunder by four horses, and publicly burnt. The King did not expect to die of his wound. He walked up and down his room, and showed himself to his servants and to the soldiery at the window. But at four o’clock in the evening he felt great pains and when the doctors visited him they found the injury to be most grievous. They gave him an enema, and discovered that the intestine had been injured. The wound turned black and the King was informed of his perilous condition. He did not at first believe this, because he was feeling fairly well. But by and by he became weaker and a Capuchin was sent for to comfort him. But when he arrived the King no longer spoke. He died upon the 2nd day of this month at midnight. The body has not been interred as yet, and has been taken to Senlis. It is said that he has asked the King of Navarre not to take revenge for his death on the city of Paris. The story goes that the monk had delivered discourses not far from Paris and had then said that he would take the King’s life. Even though he be burnt and quartered, he would feel no pain. The King of Navarre is still in St. Cloud and is besieging Paris to the extent of his power. He has made himself King of France and is thus acclaimed by his followers. He tries all ways and means in order to win to his side both the nobility and the common people. The Council of Paris has declared the Cardinal of Bourbon, who is held a prisoners in the castle of Chion, to be king. The King of Navarre intends to go to Rheims to be crowned there and to gain possession of the three royal cities.

102. Another Burning of Witches
        Schwab-Munchen
        5 September 1589
    There again follows a confession given at Court by a monster who was burnt here yesterday. Her accomplice, who was also taken prisoner with her and who is said to be a very rich peasant woman from Bobingen, died last Saturday in prison. It is reported that she has taken neither food nor drink for four days, nor given any evidence, for her devilish paramour has forbidden her to do so. She also continually called upon him to come and fetch her. She would listen to no mention of God or other holy matters. The witch, who was condemned yesterday, made a noose out of the straw on which she was lying and tied it round her neck in order to hang herself, but when food was brought in to her this was discovered and prevented.
    Rumour hath it that the late sorceress was to have been burnt with the other witch, but neither I nor others did see anything of her. She must have been led away in secret and have lain hidden under the stake, and so both must have been burnt together. These monsters are said to have denounced many others who will in their turn meet their fate. Some one tells me that they brought another four such persons from Bobingen before dawn to imprison them. It is also rumoured that they will not spare the beautiful ones, once they have done away with the ugly and the lewd ones. One of the four brought in is reported to be a wealthy widow. The Bishop has made up his mind to exterminate all this vermin from his diocese. Dillingen also shows signs of this plague. The Bishop will probably have his hands full for some time to come with burnings and in the end, perhaps, even put part of the nobility in golden chains.
    The present misfortunate female, Anna Schelkl, widow of Hans Schelkl of Bobingen, who has been produced in public, has permitted herself to be shamefully imposed upon and seduced by the accursed Satan, in contravention of the commands of God. She has repeatedly yielded herself to him in fornication and thus committed adultery in a strictly forbidden and sodomitic manner, and for over thirty years she has delivered herself to accursed witchery. She has denied God and all His Heavenly Hosts as well as Holy Baptism, and instead of the sign of the Lord she has allowed her body to be marked with the four signs of the Devil. She has thus beyond doubt permitted herself to be led astray from the divine mercy of God and to surrender herself to the sway of the Evil One. By means of the said witchcraft she has caused great harm and destruction and death to little children, people, horses and other animals and also assisted in spoiling and ruining the precious corn of the fields. Therefore the judges of this hamlet, Schwab-München, are unanimously agreed upon their verdict that Anna Schelkl be handed over to the executioner and be led by him to the common place of execution, there to be dispatched from life to death by burning on account of her loathsome and highly punishable misdeeds. Her goods and chattels to go to the Treasury of His Honour, the Venerable Herr Marquard, Bishop of Augsburg and Provost of the Cathedral of Bamberg. Let every one beware of such horrible sin!
    Warning to those named hereunder: I hereby give notice to all official persons, servitors, citizens, subjects and tenants, of whatever rank they be, who owe allegiance to my Gracious Prince and Master, and especially to those of this hamlet, on their oath and loyalty, to put this sentence into execution. Whosoever makes so bold as to hinder it by force is to be proceeded against and to be treated in like manner. Let all beware that they do not come to grief!

103. Henry IV Ascends the Throne
        Rome
        2 September 1589
    From France confirmation is received of the fact that the King of Navarre has adopted the large coat of arms of France. He causes himself to be publicly acclaimed and styled King of France. The body of the young murdered King Henry he had buried in Senlis.
    In all parish churches of Paris obsequies have been celebrated for Jacques Clément, who murdered the King. It is thought that the Paris people wish to erect a statue in eternal memory of him as the liberator of his country.

104. German Troops to Assist Henry IV
unknown
unknown
background: List of horse, foot, large and small cannon accorded to the King of Navarre by the Protestant Electors and Princes.
                                         Horse.    Foot.     Big Cannon       Small Cannon
Saxony  . . .                           4,000       8,000     16      ..
Brunswick and four Counts   .               3,000       5,000     10      ..
Hesse and four Counts   .                    2,000       4,000       5                12
Duke Johann Casimir and 
     six Counts . . .                        2,000       4,000       5               12
Brandenburg and eight Counts                    3,000       6,000     14                 20
Pomerania   . . .                            1,000          --       6                 10
Württemberg . . .                             1,500       3,000       6                12
Queen of England    . .                        1,000       6,000     --                 12
Scotland and Denmark    .                        2,000       3,000     --               --
            Total   .                           19,500      39,000      62                78

105. The Famous Alchemist Bragadini
        Venice
        November 1589
    Your Grace will no doubt have learnt from the weekly reports of one Marco Antonio Bragadini, called Mamugnano. He is the bastard son of a nobleman here and was born in Cyprus. He is reported to be able to turn base metal into gold. Our government has had him conveyed hither under safe escort because the Inquisition has put him under ban. He is forty years old and was formerly possessed of no mean fortune, but spent it in riotous living. Then for a time he was mint-master to the Grand Duke Francis. From thence he came to the late Pope Gregory, who held him in great esteem. He thus obtained several thousand ducats. But when these too had been spent, he became a Capuchin and had taken his second vows. But since he could not subject himself to the strict rule of the order, he absconded without dispensation (hence the excommunication ban by the Holy Office) and betook himself to France. There he served several princes incognito. Latterly he has returned again to Bergamo in Italy and has exhibited his art in Valcamonica and in a short time increased his fortune to over and above two hundred thousand crowns. He has expounded his craft to several persons and it had got so far that he was prevailed upon to come here of his free will. Such a host of princes and lords beleaguered him that he was scarcely safe, although he had a bodyguard of fifty archers. This man is now here in this city, holds banquet daily for five hundred people and lives in princely style in the Palazzo Dandolo on the Giudecca. He literally throws gold about in shovelfuls. This is his recipe: he takes ten ounces of quicksilver, puts it into the fire and mixes it with a drop of liquid, which he carries in an ampulla. Thus it promptly turns into good gold. He has no other wish but to be of good use to his country, the Republic. The day before yesterday he presented to the Secret Council of Ten two ampullas with this liquid, which have been tested in his absence. The first test was found to be successful and it is said to have resulted in six million ducats. I doubt not but that this will appear mighty strange to Your Grace. It verily sounds like a fairy tale, but Your Grace will surely believe us, for everything is so obvious that it cannot be doubted. The confectioning of this liquid is, however, his secret, for in his letter of safe conduct he made express demand that he be not forced to divulge this. He also craves nothing more from this our Government but that it may exercise good watch over his life and his person. In return he will provide them with gold in sufficiency according to their demands. He has already made known that he is greatly amazed at the ignorance of the world, in not discovering this art before, considering that little is requisite for this achievement. This is truly marvellous and quite novel to all of us. The alchemists have taken heart of grace again and are working night and day. One hears of nothing but of this excellent man who, as already stated, has no other wish but to serve his country.
        Venice, the 8 December 1589
    You have learnt latterly that the craft of the alchemist Marco Bragadini after being tested has been approved of. The tests have shown this sufficiently. The most noble personages here address him by the title “Illustrissimo” and feast with him daily. The Duke speaks to him in the second person. By day noblemen attend upon him, by night he is guarded by armed barges. Whereas so many strange people have arrived here, the Government holds in readiness three fully equipped galleys.
        Venice, 16 December 1589
    The alchemist is said to be at work now in making five thousand sequins per month at the request of our rulers. Thereafter he will make fifteen or sixteen millions more which he has promised to hand over to it. Day by day he shows himself to great pomp. He makes his friends presents of twenty thousand and more ducats at a time. Monday last he gave a banquet in honour of the Duc de Luxembourg, the French Catholic Ambassador in Rome, which, without counting all kinds of special confectionery, cost near upon six hundred crowns.
        Rome, 16 December 1589
    The Venetian Ambassador has solemnly besought the Pope that Mamugnano, the alchemist, who now resides in Venice, may remain there without molestation by the Holy Office, on account of his being a former Capuchin. Thereupon the Pope made answer that he was not a little surprised at the afore-mentioned Rulers putting so much faith in that man. Though his art might be found to be successful, yet it only could accrue unto him by the help of Satan.
        Venice, 4 January 1590
    It is said of our Mamugnano that his craft for transforming quicksilver into gold does suffice for small quantities, but fails to produce larger ones. It is reported that the night before last he made two ingots in the presence of one pound. There no longer exists any doubt in the matter. Discussion, however, is rife amongst some of this city’s philosophers as to whether Mamugnano can renew the material wherewith he has made his gold, once it is used up. Some say yes, and others say no, so that it is doubtful what they really think about it.

106. Gold from New Spain
        Venice
        12 January 1590
    News reaches us from Lyons that letters from Lisbon of the 18th day of December of the past year report the arrival in Seville from New Spain of the fleet with eight millions in gold. More ships are expected to arrive shortly, which had to remain behind on account of storms. They are bringing a further four millions. This cause for the delay in the arrival of the first ships is the fact that they took their course several degrees higher than is their wont in order to escape the English cruisers who were waiting for them on the usual degree. The other ships have probably taken their course along other degrees for the same reason.

107. Bragadini Works on
        Venice
        19 January 1590
    Mamugnano changed a pound of quicksilver into gold some days ago. But he is not satisfied with this weight, because he has been asked by several persons to produce a larger sum.

108. Letter from East India
        East India
        January 1590
            background: Tidings received in letters from Oriental India
    When the last ships set sail in the year 1589, the following exploits of war took place. The Armada, which Manuel Continho and his brother Thomas de Sansa had dispatched to the coast of Melindo on the 19th day of January 1589, numbered five galleys and fifteen other ships. They carried twelve hundred Portuguese. When, after heavy storms, there arrived within sight the Estrecho de Moqua, they noticed that four Turkish galleys had landed on the coast of Melindo near a place called Mombassa. On this island the Turks had built a fortress for their protection, not suspecting the coming of the Portuguese. The latter went ashore, and near on three hundred thousand natives banded themselves together in order to proceed to the island at low tide and to eat the people living there, which they had also done now and again on the mainland. For this reason the Turks had removed the cannon from the galleys for their protection, not apprehending any danger from the open sea. But the Portuguese Armada intervened, captured the Turkish galleys without resistance, and thereupon landed. When the Turks saw this they sought to take refuge on the mainland, but they were cruelly handled and eaten by the wild natives. Some of the Turks surrendered to the Portuguese, preferring captivity to being devoured by the cannibals. Thus the Portuguese took prisoner several Turks and Arab Moors.
    The Portuguese general ordered the King of Mombassa, who owes allegiance to the King of Portugal, to be decapitated, because he had granted the Turks asylum in his territory. The fortress erected by the Turks was razed to the ground and the island pillaged. Then the Portuguese left the field clear to the Simbas, who killed and ate the people before the eyes of the Armada, so that within five days not a living creature was there left on the island. When they had cleared everything and had nothing more to eat, they again went to the mainland. They thereupon set out northward for the land of John, the Priest. Those of the Armada relate that the Simbas are well equipped with sharp arrows and eat all the men they can lay their hands on, and their wives they lead away with them alive. But they do not suffer a sick person among them. As soon as one falls sick, they kill and eat him. The Portuguese report that the natives were six hundred thousand strong when they set out upon their quest. Once they reach a place they do not leave it as long as they can find a man to eat, after which they depart. Victory fell to our Armada because the Simbas had caused so much trouble to the Turks that it was an easy matter to capture the galleys, which were taken into Goa on the 16th day of March.
    Letters were sent with the ships from Santa Cruz to Protugal last January hat two of our galleys and twelve galleots fought bravely with the blacks near Goa. The galleots withdrew into a harbour twelve miles from Goa, whither the Governor dispatched a fleet. This fleet conquered the coast and drove the natives inland.
    The fortress which our Armada destroyed in Malcca has been built up anew by the people there. The Governor, however, with three hundred Portuguese, once more drove the people away and tore down the building. All the ports of Malacca are of great importance, for it is thither the ships come to take in cargoes of pepper and other condiments and freight. It would be well to conquer the island of Sumatra. With four to six thousand Protuguese it would be possible to prevent all navigation to Moqua. The money, however, is lacking. Last year an English ship entered the Sunda Straits and took in a load of pepper. The captain had brought with him a letter and a present to the Bishop there, but the latter accepted neither. When the English made their way back towards England round the Cape of Good Hope they sailed forth with two more ships and took their course through the Estrecho de Moqua, where one of the ships was wrecked. With the other two they proceeded to New Spain and Mexico where they pillaged and took whatever they could lay their hands upon. From thence they sailed to the Philippines, where they loaded all manner of wares from China. One ship then sailed home, and another to the Sunda Straits to fetch a cargo of pepper. Navigation from New Spain to China has become an ordinary occurrence. Ships arrive there daily. Last year Don Juan de Gona sailed to Mexico, but when our Governor learnt of this he sent a galleot to fight him, for it would be India’s ruin if he were allowed free passage. For there is a convention between the King of Portugal and the King of Spain according to which the Spaniards are not allowed to sail to the Philippines. By this the King, our Lord, vowed he would abide when he took possession of Portugal.
    The Jesuits daily convert people in Japan to the Christian Faith. They have entire mastery of this island.
    The Moors of Ceylon have taken a Christian for their king. He is the cousin of the last King. He asks for two hundred monks who are to baptize his subjects.

109. Further Successes by Bragadini
        Venice
        26 January 1590
    Concerning the alchemist, Mamugnano, no one harbours doubts any longer about his daily experiments in changing quicksilver into gold. It was realized that his craft did not go beyond one pound of quicksilver, however much various persons begged him to produce more. Thus the belief is now held that his allegations to produce a number of millions have been a great fraud, in which he caused people to believe. For he who can make a small amount of gold should also be able to produce a large quantity. This is the question upon which learned professors hold dispute. Meanwhile he has cut down his expenses, also reduced his banqueting, and is seen about with a smaller suite than formerly. It is reported from Spain that the King has concluded an agreement with the Genoese for a loan of five millions towards the end of the months of March and April, one million during the middle of July and the last during the middle of September.
            Venice, 26 January 1590
    The alchemist Mamugnano is making gold here for his needs. He is intending this Shrovetide to hold a joyous masque in the Square of St. Stephen, for which purpose he is having sent hither six fine stallions from Mantua.

110. Printing of the Bible for the Heathen
        Rome
        26 January 1590
    The Pope has learned with particular satisfaction that the Grand Duke of Florence is willing to have the books of the Bible printed here at his expense in the Chaldean, Arabic, Syrian and Ethiopian languages, and to have them expedited to these countries. These people have complained that hitherto they had to live in blindness for the lack of biblical writings and they demand to be instructed in the Christian Faith.

111. Adultery at the Court of Saxe-Coburg
        Strasburg
        17 February 1590
    John Casimir is said to be in sore trouble concerning his consort, for she has committed adultery with a Pole. The latter has had intercourse with her seven or eight times, and upon each occasion she presented him with a hundred crowns. When these things became bruited abroad, he was taken into strict custody to the Palace of Mannehim, about two miles distant from the city of Worms. Not long age he escaped, but was caught again in the palatinate. By order of the said Duke, several hundredweight of iron were fastened to his person, so that he may not be able to flee again. May God console him and all such as are afflicted!
    The Princess has been divested of all her princely apparel and raiment. She is reported to be wearing the clothing of one of her former tiring women and to be in durance no less hard than her lover. Only an old woman is let in to her.
    Otherwise information has been received that the alchemist of Venice has been instigated by the Grand Vizier to pass himself off as an alchemist and an artist in order thus to gain admittance to the city of Venice. This scheme has been, however, discovered, and the alchemist will not escape punishment.

112. Genoese Money for the League
        Venice
        9 February 1590
    Tidings come from France that the Spinolas, wealthy Genoese merchants who did a large business in Paris, have collected a goodly part of the moneys owing to them from such countries as France, England and the Netherlands. Finding themselves possessed in Paris of so large a sum in cash as near on four hundred thousand crowns, they dared not remove it, because they were afeared that it might be taken from them. Still less did they wish to take it to Italy or Spain because trade there is at a standstill. They are now offering this sum to the League, and His Royal Majesty of Spain has promised its repayment in Spain. In Rouen there are other Spanish merchants, who possess a still larger fortune, which they also wish to offer to the League.
    It is said that Mamugnano has won near on ten thousand ducats gambling with several noblemen, so that rumour hath it that he is as clever at gambling as at making gold. He is reported to have produced in these latter days ten thousand gold crowns at one sitting, which fact is confirmed by a credible witness, who was present on that occasion.

113. Attempt to Poison Philip II
        Venice
        6 April 1590
    Aa terrifying miracle, so they say, has occurred in Spain. One morning, as the King after praying in his oratory before a crucifix, which he held in great devotion, as was his daily custom, wished to kiss the image of Christ, the latter turned away from him. This greatly horrified and frightened the King and he once more began to pray that God might forgive him his sins. He thereupon once more tried to kiss the image of Christ, which again withdrew from him. When the King had perceived this with great concern and affliction, he sent for his Father Confessor, to whom he related this miracle. The latter then began praying to God that He might reveal this secret unto him. When he had concluded his prayers, he told the King to send for two of his most eminent councillors and bid them kiss the crucifix. They did so and soon thereafter fell sick and died. Some aver that the crucifix was poisoned so that the King might lose his life thereby.

114. Execution of Two Children
        Vienna
        24 April 1590
    Yesterday two boys, the one thirteen and the other seventeen years of age, were put to death by fire and sword. For some time they had caused much damage through setting fire to property. May God guard henceforth all the children of pious parents!

115. Another Burning of Witches
        Schwab-München
        4 May 1590
    Last Wednesday the innkeeper’s wife of Möringen and the baker’s wife of Bobingen were tried here for their misdeeds in witchcraft. Mine hostess is a short, stout, seventy-year-old doxy, who had taken to her accursed witchery when eighteen years of age. This she has practised fifty-two years, and it is easy to imagine what havoc she has wrought in such a long time. As the result of fervent petitioning, her sentence has been lightened inasmuch as she was first strangled and then only burned.
    The other was only seduced to this work of the Devil by Ursula Krämer, who was the first to be executed here. So far, she has not perpetrated any sore misdeeds, but so much has she owned to, that her life is forfeit. Even on her day of judgment she still thought she could vindicate herself, and even at the place of execution I myself heard her say that she was dying innocent. Most unwillingly did she submit to her fate. But in the end she was reconciled to it and prayed long to God that He might pardon her misdeeds.
    This morn another woman was brought hither from Möringen. Only half a year ago she married off one of her sons to a widow, who is said to be of the same craft. Thus it is hoped that it may incriminate others here. To-morrow or next week some more are to be brought here, but no one knows from whence. There is much discussion here about the hostess of Göggingen. May the Lord grant that this be but idle talk.

116. Fresh Deeds of the Alchemist of Venice
        Venice
        11 May 1590
    Whereas Mamugnano, the alchemist, passed some time in a village a certain distance from here, and several persons suspected him of making gold for other people, his rooms were sealed at the request of his creditors. By order of the Signori Capitani, however, one room was unsealed again.
    During the last days a large fish was caught by the fishers near Malamocco. It weighs more than a thousand pounds, according to our weights, and measures twenty spans. It has two wide wings, eyes as large as those of an ox, and a round, small mouth with two teeth, one in the upper and one in the lower jaw. They are almost as thick as a finger and the fish has a strange colour. What kind of a fish it is the fishermen are as yet unable to say.
    We have just learned that Mamugnano, the alchemist, has returned here. The Pope is said to have granted him absolution, but he had to make a donation of five thousand crowns and enter the Order of the Knights of Malta.

117. A Miracle in Bohemia
        Prague
        6 July 1590
    In the town of Kaurim in this kingdom of Bohemia, five miles from here, there lives in the house of a widow a God-fearing, industrious man, Nicholas by name, with his wife and three small children. He was so poor that he had naught but four pennies. With these he went to a baker’s on the morning of the 22nd of May and bought a loaf of bread. Carrying this home, he wondered oft, mid heavy sighing, how he should be able to provide further for himself, his wife and the children. He therefore entreated God in his heart that He might graciously maintain and feed them. He thereupon divided the load among the children, but after a little while they again demanded food. However, he neither had any money nor knew how it could be obtained, so he sent out his wife to borrow a few loaves of bread, but she accomplished nothing and came home with empty hands. Thereupon the man decided to go and dig loam which he might sell for money or barter for bread. He took a small pickaxe, and leaving the town behind, went to Brandschech Farm, near a village named Strzebovle, which belongs to the town kaurim. As he reached the road near the estate of Herr Johann Lanna, Imperial Judge in the town of Kaurim, he discovered loam near it and thrust his pickaxe several times into the ground. Upon this, four large lumps of a snowy white substance were disclosed. He gathered these up and brought them home to his spouse, but was not aware as yet that they were flour. He ordered her to obtain as much bread for it as she could. She was absent a long while, as many people were greatly astonished, and some of them recognized this to be exceeding good flour. Since the aforesaid Nicholas waxed impatient and would no longer await the return of his wife, he set forth once more, taking with him a large napkin. After he had dug for a little while, he again found a great quantity of the white substance. He deposited it in the napkin and he had hardly begun to heap it on the cloth when the cloth was full, as he himself testifies. He thereupon carried it home. When he returned, his wife informed him that what he had found was not loam, but right good flour. He showed it to may people, who all recognized it as flour and bought it from him in lumps. Several gentlemen of the Council partook of it, and dumplings and baby’s pap ere also made therefrom. The bread is beautifully white, is of a sweet and agreeable flavour and of the fragrance of orris-root.
    When this occurrence became know, many people went to visit the poor man and found his story to be true. The bailiffs, however, feared that the people might injure the corn, and therefore erected a fence around the place where the hole had been dug. In spite of this, many came from the cities, villages and hamlets to witness the miracle. They dug lumps out of the soil, small and large. Some poor people collected it in barrels. The flour is clean, and contains no earth or loam and easily separates from these substances. It is also slightly moist and holds together until it be exposed to the sun. It is of benefit to those who are God-fearing and especially such as use it for their own sustenance or that of their children. But, when unbelievers or scoffers touch it, it turns to sand. If it is allowed to drop to the earth, it becomes very white. The flour has also been brought hither, and many honourable persons have seen it with their own eyes and touched it with their own hands. They have thanked God profoundly for His boundless Wisdom and Mercy. May He feed those who are in poverty and of a believing heart now and through all Eternity!

118. Letter from Japan
unknown
        25 July 1590
            background: From a letter written by Ægidius Matta, Priest of the Society of Jesul to the General of his Order concerning the progress of Christianity.
    King Sapume, hitherto the most embittered enemy of the Christian Faith, demands that one of our brethren, who have come hither from the Spanish Philippines, be sent to Kangoxima, the most important harbour of his whole kingdom (whence I am writing), in order to hear confessions, preach and instruct his subjects. He also wishes that we found a settlement in the aforesaid port. He first did greatly insist upon this, but now has agreed to defer the matter till the arrival of the Father Inspector.
    P. Caspar Celius, Vice-Provincial for Japan, who has lived the life of a saint and died immaculate, was taken to his grave in solemn state. This was marked not only by the numerous attendance of our Fathers, who chanced at this time to be present here, but by the presence of many Thomus-Christians who followed the funeral to Arima, where he was buried. His successor is Pater Gometius, who, despite his delicate health, is held in no less esteem than the departed. Concerning the position of Christianity in Japan, it is to be reported that three years have now passed since our Order was banished from this country. But by the protection of God we have met with no hindrance as the result of this banishment. Also the number of Christians in spite of this has not decreased, but, on the contrary, increased at a quicker rate than at the time when the Tyrant pretended to favour our doings. Several members of the nobility have become Christians and vie with their subjects in Christian zeal. D. Augustinus, a Christian, a vassal of the Tyrant, himself converted the Prince of Gotti to the Faith. It is of no mean advantage to the state of Christendom, that the islands upon which the said Christians are living, are situate far from the trading route of the Chinese. For this reason, also, all those who instruct in the Faith are removed far from the danger of a rebellion.
    Nevertheless, in towns which are in closer proximity to the Chinese, such as Arima and Omura, the secrets of our Faith have been taught at all times openly and fearlessly and that with great success. In proof whereof there is the multitude of those who received the Blessed Sacrament. Apart from this, many crucifixes have been erected at various places, and frequented by servants of the Tyrant, without their being mutilated or pulled down. There are not many persons either who would easily consent to denounce us to the Tyrant, for they do not wish to cause him any annoyance, since he prefers to avoid trouble where he can. He likewise has the habit of passing things over in silence—although they be well known to him—when they appear to be vexatious.
    The penalty of banishment is not so severely carried out in the case of the Japanese as it occasionally is elsewhere. It is therefore less strange, that we, though we be banished, yet continue our work with little hindrance. For all things that follow appear to the Japanese as banishment: the deprivation of the sight of that Mighty One, who has expelled us, and the avoidance of places that are greatly frequented, and the exhibition of grief and mourning in demeanour and attire, and a life fashioned on that of the Bonzes.
    But now I revert again to the progress which Christianity has made here. One Ethnicus, or First Lord of the name of Taikosama, a most violent enemy of Christianity, has not been able to hinder the spread of the Faith in his territory. Churches and crucifixes have been erected and all the inhabitants of a not unimportant town were baptized by me. A church was also built in many places—not only in those of great importance—and crosses were erected although the full time does not seem as yet at hand. Moreover a large number of those who have so far besieged our Port of Kangoxima now demand to be baptized. Further, also several Ethnici, who have been held prisoners by the Christians at various places, are also admitted to Holy Baptism, so that once the Tyrant Taikosama has been vanquished, we cherish the great hope—please God—that all those persons will adopt the Christian Faith. Our Ethnici here can scarcely recover from their wonderment at perceiving how little, if at all, we, who have been banished by the order of the Tyrant, allow ourselves to be frightened by his ordinances. Even three of the Thomi Ethnici extol our innocence, because, although all counsel us to do so, we cannot be prevailed upon to travel to China, leaving one or the other behind, in order to escape the present persecution.
    They say it seems as though we were being detained by Providence, likewise as if we were endeavouring through our safety to demonstrate the might of God, Whose messengers we claim to be, as against the power of His enemies. As is men’s custom they have taken this into their heads and firmly believe that we draw our strength from the enemies of Taikosama, so that our banishment from Japan may be rendered the more difficult. The Tyrant will imagine the same, when he hears that we are still in Japan.
    We take credit to ourselves for hoping for the best. In the seminaries, which were instituted by Gregory XIII in Japan, a multitude of helpers grows day by day. This will be of the greatest importance for the growth of the Faith when Christianity is once more tolerated in these islands.

119. Famine in Paris
        Lyons
        11 August 1590
    Although it was hoped that we should know before ending this letter how matters stand in the city of Paris, there have been no reliable tidings from that city since the 15th day of July. At this date, the Parisians still held out, but it is said that the troops of Navarre stormed the Faubourg St. Antoine on the 19th day of July. The Duc de Mayenne is reported to have received four thousand infantry and six hundred horse from the Netherlands together with a regiment of lansquenets from Lützelburg. There is great hunger in Paris; a pound of white bread costs half a crown; mutton, fore or hind part, legs or quarters for roasting, five crowns; ox or cow, one hundred and forty crowns; six sheep, one hundred crowns; a pound of horseflesh, five sous. Rumour has it that people are eating mice, cats and dogs, and also that wine is very dear.

120. Frightful Apparition in the Sky at Vienna
        Vienna
        11 August 1590
    These days at 10 o’clock at night a most alarming wonder has manifested itself in the skies. The firmament was rent asunder and through this gap one could distinguish chariots and armies, riders with yellow, white, red and black standards, moving as though to do battle against each other. This awesome and unusual vision continued from ten at night till about two of the morning, and was witnessed with alarm and dismay by many honest and trustworthy people. The significance thereof is known but to God Almighty, Who may graciously prevent the shedding of innocent blood.

121. The Plague in Rome
        Rome
        15 August 1590
    Since the month of July eight thousand people have perished from the plague which hath broken out in this city. One of the brothers of our Governor died during one of these last days, also his wife, who departed this life only two hours before him. They were buried together. A great number likewise have died in Pisa, and because of the great mortality in Leghorn only a few are left there, for many have fled.

122. Fear of the Witches in Suabia
        Schwab-München in the Bishopric of Augsburg
        30 August 1590
    Since the execution here of the two sorceresses, two more were brought hither from Wehringen as prisoners. This village is first to be cleansed of this vermin before a start is made here or elsewhere. It is said that there are not many already been put to death. If once they but make a beginning here, there will be work for some time, especially if matters be allowed to proceed with such lack of diligence as hitherto. But where you dwell there are many who might be caught, if only you willed it so, but the right spirit is lacking. Be that as it may, let the authorities take care how they justify one day their action before God.

123. Mighty Earthquakes in Vienna
        Vienna
        16 September 1590
    I cannot hide from thee that great havoc was wrought here by an earthquake which began yesterday at 5 o’clock in the afternoon. It shook the houses in the whole of the town and lifted the people bodily into the air. At midnight it caused several houses to collapse and killed various persons. Much brickwork and large pieces of masonry were hurled from the steeples of the Churches of St. Stephen, St. Michael and the Church of Our lady. Likewise in the royal residence it made stones, fragments, bricks and chimneys to split and break off. The roofs remained intact. The Schottenkirche is half destroyed. There was great terror among the populace, and it looked as though the Day of the Last Judgment was upon us.
    The damage amounts to many thousand florins. At 2 o’clock after midnight there was another earthquake which was not so terrific. The people fled from the houses into the streets. A learned man, whose name is unknown, is said to have predicted that there will soon follow a much more terrible earthquake. May God have mercy upon us.
    The lady of high rank who was possessed of the devil was exorcized yesterday in the Schottenkirche and thereafter became quite a reasonable creature. Last week when the priest was working upon her she remained in a trance for about an hour and life seemed extinct. When she came to herself she spoke many things that were passing strange and began to call out: “Woe, woe unto you Regents of Austria, woe unto Pappenheim, woe to the city of Pressburg, for it will be burned to the ground. Woe unto the city of Vienna, for it will perish!”  She also related that the Angel Gabriel led her to the gates of hell and showed to her the souls of the condemned and their tortures. She pretends to have seen many great men, in particular Martin Luther, who pitifully cries out anent his teachings and sermons.

124. The Spread of Christendom in Japan
        Rome
        30 September 1590
    The General of the Order of Jesuits has latterly submitted a satisfactory report to the Pope with reference to Japanese affairs and the growth of Christianity in that country. Although the Jesuits have had to endure throughout many years grievous persecution from the unbelievers, they have finally succeeded in happily prevailing upon the King to recall them to his side and to grant them free and safe conduct throughout his kingdom, although he himself has not adopted the Christian Faith.

125. Disturbances in Prague
        Prague
        24 December 1590
    During the past day a clamour was raised here that the Jesuits and the priests of the Pope are minded to take by force several churches of the Hussites on Christmas Eve, and retain them for the purpose of holding their services therein. It was also rumoured that the Jesuits have received outfits for war for some hundred men and have hidden them in their College. This alarm was raised by a monk, who said that he was awarded by the late Pope the privilege of obtaining possession of the monastery and church of St. Emaus, together with its revenue and appurtenances. This outcry came to the ears of His Imperial Majesty, who ordered inquiries to be made with reference to the matter. It has transpired that several artisans had spoken thus during a carousal. At the order of His Majesty they were examined by the councillors of the city of Prague. They were sent to court and questioned from whom they held such information. It resulted in a tanner being charged with spreading the rumour. He was put in prison in the Altstadt where he was questions in kindly manner, but later put to the rack, as to where he had first heard these tales. But he pleaded ignorance. His journeymen were called and testified that he voiced such opinions before even they had partaken any wine. The aldermen condemned him to be executed with the sword. They submitted the sentence to the Emperor and asked him whether they should carry it out.
    His Majesty issued a proclamation in the Bohemian language which was exhibited in all public places and, to some extent, has pacified the people, who were in an ugly temper. At first they had armed for resistance, although they had no grounds for so doing. In all parts of Prague there broke out disturbances. It has been ordered that a number of burgesses hold night-watch in all the suburbs of Prague. Likewise, a house-to-house visitation was carried out in order to ascertain how many strange guests there be with each citizen, how named, from whence, and of what nature their business. This had to be reported to His Majesty. Moreover, it was ordained that whosoever should know or hear of any danger should give tidings thereof to His Majesty or the Council. This scheme may lead to great bloodshed, theft and pillaging, if by chance a daring murderer or robber make use of this rumour to start an outcry and raise disorder in the town of Prague.

126. Attempt to Poison the King of Poland
        Vienna
        4 January 1591
    It is reported here that latterly King Maximilian was nearly murdered by a Pole, who tendered him poisoned wine. When His Majesty had ended his meal and asked for a drink, the cellarer, as is the usage, poured the wine out of the bottle, partook thereof and filled the drinking vessel which the royal cup-bearer held out to him. The latter tasted the wine and was immediately thereon taken ill, so that His Majesty had the wine removed. The royal cup-bearer fell to the ground in the pangs of death. This caused great consternation, for it is to be assumed that the malefactor made use of a very potent poison. It is surmised that the drinking-cup alone was poisoned, because the cellarer felt no ill effect after partaking of the wine. The Lord Almighty has doubtlessly graciously guarded our God-fearing Master. The Polish miscreant, however, waited in the Neustadt outside the castle in order to learn the outcome of his deed. He was shortly thereupon cast into prison, but owing to careless supervision, made his escape, for which the civic judge will have to answer.

127. A Case of Moral Compulsion in Salzburg
        Salzburg
        3 February 1591
    Five citizens were recently ordered to the Town Hall. There it was pointed out to them that His Highness the Bishop had commanded that every one who desired to live or dwell here should go to Confession and partake of Holy Communion at the appointed seasons. But since they had neglected to do so, His Highness was forced to treat them in different fashion and to punish them on account of their disobedience. For that reason were they detained that day and night at the Town Hall. Upon the ensuing day about 8 o’clock they were led by four halberdiers to the parish church, carrying lighted tapers. In the church they had to remain kneeling, holding the lighted candles until the sermon was well finished. The priest thundered and stormed against the heretics in truly ferocious manner. After the sermon, they were taken to the cathedral where they had to remain  kneeling throughout the saying of Mass. Thereafter they were permitted to return home.
    But it is reported of one of these burgesses that afterwards in a tavern, having drunk more than his fill, he made merry thereof. This came to the ears of the Bishop and the latter had him tickled with fifteen strokes of the birch.

128. Splendid Handicraft in Strasburg
        Strasburg
        15 February 1591
    Work upon the organ in our cathedral has been proceeding now for three-quarters of a year. The organ is intended to be a masterpiece. It possesses eight thousand and several hundred pieces and eighteen stops. The largest pipes are fourteen aam across to the mouth-piece. This has been ascertained by measuring.

129. Alchemists at the Imperial Court
        Prague
        14 May 1591
    The English alchemist, who has recently been taken to Pürglitz as a prisoner, appeared to be in the depths of despair these latter days and refused to partake of food, so that it was feared that he might die. But he has since recovered. His Imperial Majesty has ordered a doctor and a councillor of the Court to proceed to him, in order to examine him. Various other officers were also sent with orders to extract information, if need be, by torture. Although Herr Peter von Rosenberg has arrived here in place of his brother to find out what were the grounds for the accusations against the alchemist, he has as yet been unable to get at the rights of the matter. Some are of the opinion that Herr von Rosenberg would petition for the release of the alchemist, but it is said that the opposing faction is too strong.

130. Rising in Saragossa
        Saragossa
        15 May 1591
    Of news we have little that is good. To-day Antonio Perez, the King’s secretary, was taken from the prison to the Holy Office. Thereupon the population of the whole town rose in arms with shouts of ‘Liberty." More than six thousand armed men forgathered, went to the house of the Count of Almenara, and broke down the gates, so that it became urgent to still the wrath of the multitude. This was done by the Justices of Aragon, who led the Count from his house on foot. The populace assailed him in such wise that it is a miracle that he was not torn to pieces. During this frightful affray, the Count received two wounds. He was taken to jail amid the shouting of the people, who wanted to put him to death as a traitor. Thereafter they all precipitated themselves into the court of the Inquisition, demanding the release of Antonio Perez and declaring that otherwise they would kill the Inquisitors. Two servants of the Inquisition were fired upon and perished. This riot lasted until the Viceroy and the Arch-bishop ordered that the secretary should be taken back to prison. There he remains and so the fury of the populace has somewhat abated.
    The Archbishop has been in grave danger. For, although several counts and other noblemen came to comfort him, his life was not safe. I stood before him with a crucifix and perceived how sorely he was afflicted by this affair. We had the intention to hie to the Cathedral to fetch the Blessed Sacrament in order to assuage the fury of the population. But we feared that there might be attempts made on our lives and that of the Archbishop, for two of the Archbishop’s servants who had been sent to the Cathedral were stoned.

131. An Interrupted Procession in Vienna
        Vienna
        11 June 1591
    About eight or ten days ago there was made a loud outcry that bandits and such like rabble would cause a disturbance and commit pillage and murder. The inhabitants of the houses were also warned to make ready and to hasten to their appointed places on the stroke of the bell. Thus every one has been in great torment and has armed himself to the utmost and got himself in readiness, so that no powder was to be bought in the whole of the town. On the day of the Procession of Corpus Christi many people remained in their dwellings, harbouring great fear because the Archduke remained at Ebersdorf and did not come into the city. When, therefore, upon the said day of St. Stephen a shot was fired in the Singerstrasse, a rapscallion raised a loud cry that there was a might disturbance in the Imperial stables. Thereupon such terror seized the people on account of the shooting that they began to run hither and thither, knocking down and trampling each other under foot. They lost their cloaks, hats and weapons, and many hundreds took refuge in the Spitalkirche. They were all so affrighted that they but gazed at each other and were unable to utter a single word. This panic, however, promptly subsided and no one is able to adduce its cause or origin. In the rush many threw away their flags and banners. The clergy remained unaffected, otherwise we should have witnessed a pretty comedy. I take it as an ill omen and for a warning and constigation of God. May He graciously guard us!

132. Harsh Durance for the Alchemist Kelley
        Prague
        2 July 1591
    The English alchemist is reported to have been immured at Pürglitz. He is to have no air, but that which comes through a hole, through which he can reach for his food bit by bit. It is feared that it will be done with him as with the alchemist at Munich. On examining the accounts of Rosenberg it was found that the Englishman had cost him over three hundred thousand florins. It is amazing that these noblemen have allowed themselves to be duped in such fashion. He is said to have cost the Emperor near on a thousand Rhenish guilders.

133. A Miracle in Bourges
        Venice
        2 August 1591
    There are shown here replicas of the crosses which appeared in Bourges in France in the church of St. Mary upon the cloths and coverings of the altars and upon the vestments, as well as on the cowl of a monk, as he was preaching. They are square in shape and of the size of a half-crown in gold. Because the heretics would give no credence in such miracles, these little crosses appeared on the ruffs of different laymen and women. Although one is disposed to regard this miracle as a warning of God to the Catholics on account of their sins, there are many others who take it to be a happy omen of victory; it is of common knowledge that such a sign appeared to Constantine in presage of his victory against Maxentius.

134. Death of Pope Gregory XIV
        Rome
        19 October 1591
    After every possible remedy had been employed to avert the Pope’s illness, his strength and speech presently forsook him. He departed this life on Tuesday last at 7 o’clock in the palace of San Marco, where he had his abode. Although it was late at night, the Chief Chamberlain, Cardinal Gaetano, was sent for to come to San Marco. He ordered the Papal Seal to be broken and took into custody all papers and documents, as is the custom at the death of the Pope. He also made all dispositions with regard to the body. The latter was opened in the presence of the physicians and it is said that the right lung was affected and that the kidneys were full of black and decayed blood. A gallstone was found likewise, the size of a hen’s egg and weighing two ounces. On the Wednesday in the early hours of the morning the corpse was accompanied to the palace by the Pope’s nephews and his most intimate friends, the Swiss Guard and the light cavalry. The Pope lay in state in the Capella Vaticana, from whence the Canons of St. Peter fetched him and took him to their church, where he still lies, so that the people may kiss his foot as is their wont.
    
135. Election of Pope Innocent IX
        Rome
        2 November 1591
    On the morning of the past Sunday, the 27th day of October, which day had been fixed for the entering into Conclave, Mass was said at the usual place in the Chapel of St. Peter. Cardinal Gesualdo, as Deacon of the Sacred College, celebrated the Mass of the Holy Ghost and the Bishop of Bergamo delivered a solemn address. Thereupon the Cardinals entered in procession into Conclave—and this was only closed at 16 o’clock at night, in order that they could be provided with everything that was needful to them. On the Sunday the Cardinals held a congregation in the Capella Paulina. There the fourth Papal Bull with regard to the Pope’s election was read out and the Custodian and the civic officers had to take the oath of allegiance and obedience until such time as the new pope should be elected. The other relates and ministers were instructed to guard the Conclave with the utmost care.
    The ambassadors of the various sovereigns did not omit to remind the Cardinals at this time of their several interests. It was rumoured on the ensuing day that Cardinal Madrucci had said that for divers reasons he felt that he could not become pope and wished therefore that no notice should be taken of his name, but that the claims of those only should be considered, whose election demanded less thought and deliberation.
    On the Monday morning, the customary ballot (Scrutinium) began. Cardinal San Quatro received twenty-seven votes. Upon the Tuesday the second ballot was taken in which San Quatro received twenty-eight votes. This caused alarm to those who liked him not; those, however, who favoured him felt greatly hopeful. After the midday meal a public Practica was arranged in order that his election might be brought to a close. Towards the twenty-third hour this was finally decided and by the Act of Adoration, with the consent of all the Cardinals, he was made pope. Thereupon they led him to the Capella Paulina and then, with the usual ceremonial, to St. Peter’s. He has assumed the name of Innocent IX.
    It is clearly evident that the election of this Pope must needs be a work of God, since it was completed with such rapidity. As far as human responsibility is concerned, it is to be laid at the door of Cardinal Mendoza, the head of the Spanish party.
    The Pope is seventy-three years of age, and although frail and delicate of body, may yet live a great many years. He has adopted Signore Cesare Facchinetto, his sister’s son, as his own. The latter has himself sons and daughters, who will be the first to rejoice in the good fortune of the Pope. The Pope is held to be a Roman native, because he has always sojourned here since the days of Pope Paul III.
    It is expected of him that his rule will be one of beneficence. The Pope has endeavoured during these days to provide the town with supplies of grain. He is also said to harbour a great desire to exterminate the bandits here. To-morrow, Sunday, on the 3rd day of the month, he is to be crowned, according to his wish, in all privacy.

136. News from Russia and Moldavia
        Prague
        12 November 1591
    We have tidings here that the two brothers in Moscow have fallen out on account of the ruling of the country, and are waging war upon one another. Thereupon the Great Khan of Tartary has invaded this country with an army more than one hundred thousand strong and devastated it. But, meanwhile, as the younger brother has died, the elder has combined both armies and beaten the Khan of the Tartars, killing eighty thousand men. The Khan escaped with only three thousand men, the others were dispersed.
    From Kaschau we receive a letter, dated the 1st day of November, reporting the arrival thither of the Wojwode Petrus, who has escaped from Moldavia, bringing with him much stately property and over two hundred followers. He had with him one hundred waggons and twelve camels laden with jewels and gold. He arrived in Szatmar with his youthful son, but gave his people leave to return home. He camps for the nonce two miles from Bartfeld where he would like to winter. He has communicated this wish to His Majesty and awaits his gracious permission so to do. This Petrus is a fine, hoary old nobleman, he has ruled long over the land and since it is exceeding rich, he has amassed wealth untold. When the Grand Turk learnt of his great fortune, he intended to have him strangled, but the Wojwode became aware of this fell purpose in good time, and escaped, fleet of foot, with his treasure, his councillors and chancellors. Where he will settle ultimately we shall see.

137. Festivities at the Court of Dresden
Dresden
        1591
            background: Concerning the recent Christening of the child of the Elector of Saxony and the accompanying festivities.
    The tilting-ground at the palace of the Elector in Dresden has been prepared in such magnificent and gay fashion, as I have never beheld before. The seats have been covered throughout with sprigs of green fir, and between the arches and the lists there have been dug into the ground about one hundred mighty and lofty firs. These were daintily hung with fine oranges, pomegranates, large pumpkins and other luscious fruit. All kinds of large and small live birds fluttered about betwixt the fir-trees. Likewise many red and black squirrels flitted continually from one tree to the other. His Grace the Elector marched up three times with his miners, to the sound of fine music and the miners’ songs. It was right wondrous to listen to these, and to see such a procession as had never been witnessed before. The last time, His Grace led one hundred huntsmen into the lists. They were all clad in green and made beautiful music, singing and blowing their horns. The huntsmen carried a very large, transparent and beautifully decorated cage, containing four bears, six boars, four wild wolves, two lynxes, several foxes, many hares and other small animals, such as martens, badgers, squirrels, rabbits and wild fowl. These were released on the tilting-ground, and whosoever contrived to catch one of them was allowed to keep it. The four bears, the wild boars, the wolves and the lynxes were let loose in the tilting-ground, where they roamed to and fro. The people stood in the courtyard. But the dogs kept good guard over the animals and the people took no harm. Only the wild boars charged among the populace and many fell to the ground. But the dogs gave them no quarter, so that, thanks be to God, no one was hurt.
    The jousts were continued throughout four days. The mantenators were barons. The races were run for money. The sponsors were the Elector of Brandenburg, his spouse and the Administrator; the latter, however, was unable to be present because he had fallen from his horse when attempting to tilt at the ring, and broken his shoulder blade. But by good fortune he was not greatly injured and he is right well once more. The Landgrave, Maurice of Hesse, the old Duke of Brunswick, Philip by name, and a Count von Rolinz were also sponsors. Otherwise no strange guests have we had here.
    His Grace the Elector has had the little Princess christened, omitting the exorcisms. This has highly pleased the Calvinists and it looks as though a change of religion would occur here.

138. Death of Queen Elizabeth of France
        Vienna
        25 January 1592
    Of news all I have to impart is that Mistress Elizabeth, Queen of France and Archduchess of Austria, peacefully passed away in the Lord on the Wednesday past at 11 o’clock of the night. May God grant rest to her soul! Although for the length of forty-five days she had been woefully racked by palpitation and stinging pains at the heart, the physicians were unable to find a remedy for alleviating these. As she felt especial longing for a sight of His Majesty, her most beloved brother, His Majesty had arrived the previous night by mail coach with but a few horses. His arrival caused the Queen no little joy in her great suffering before her end. Of the arrival and departure of His Majesty there were very few informed, with the exception of the court officials. On the occasion of this demise all festivities and music were forbidden in this town, at the risk of strict punishment for the contravention of this order.
    Upon the following Thursday throughout the day every one, rich and poor alike, was allowed to view this pious Queen. Many thousands of persons came and went. The Queen was held in very high esteem, especially by the poor, to whom she had shown great kindness and given bounteous alms. His Imperial Majesty left for Prague again on the following morn.

139. Disputes between Calvinists and Lutherans
        Frankfort
        12 February 1592
    We are advised thus from Leipzig: The common mob of artisans and shop-apprentices have caused a riot following upon the death a few days ago of Christianus Schütz. He was formerly Chaplain-in-Ordinary at the Court of Dresden. He was dismissed during the lifetime of Duke August, because of his adherence to Calvinism. The crowd ran with yells and clamour to the house of the deceased and broke the windows of the afflicted widow, shouting therewhile that he should be buried under the gallows. He and his following had caused the death of the young princely offspring and the common folk likewise regarded their destitution as due to him. Since the demise of our Sovereign of blessed memory near on seventeen hundred persons have been dismissed; this has caused a large number of wicked and evil-minded ruffians to be about. As the persons living in Schüt’s house feared to be molested by that vulgar concourse, the widow of the Elector had to post halberdiers in and outside the house, so that order might be maintained till the funeral. When this was about to take place the next day there was no one to be found willing to carry the deceased to his grave. He had, therefore, to be laid upon a cart and drawn by a horse. Some rapscallions then banded themselves together, causing such clamour with howling, yelling and whistling that it defies description. They pelted the mourners, of whom there were few, with mud so that these had perforce to retire.
    Another case occurred here this week. Dr. Gunderman, formerly pastor in this town, was cast into prison at the castle a few weeks ago. His wife was greatly mortified thereat. She was on the point of confinement and was seized by such melancholia that she hanged herself on the roasting spit of the kitchen. These will be terrible tidings for the doctor when he comes to hear of them.

140. War upon the Bandits in the Papal State
        Rome
        14 March 1592
    A few days ago a father and his son who had given refuge to the bandits were arrested and taken to the Castello.
    The bandits had given chase to the new Nuncio for Naples, Monsignor Aldobrandini, in such wise that he had hardly been able to save himself. Only a short time ago, a day’s journey from here, they plundered a castle and a market and robbed goods worth over sixty thousand crowns. They led away with them many men and women and set fire to the market. The Pope has issued orders for the enrolment of four thousand soldiers and granted sixty thousand crowns for this purpose.

141. Birth of the Antichrist
        Venice
        14 April 1592
    This week a News-letter has been circulated here which is said to have been written by the Grand Master of Malta and divers other Christian princes. This News-letter reports that in a certain province of Babylon there has been born to a woman of evil repute a child whose father is unknown. The child is reported to be covered with cat’s hair and to be a dreadful sight. It began to talk eight days after its birth and to walk after a month. It is said to have intimated that it is the Son of God. At its birth the sun grew dark at midday and on the previous night a mighty flame of fire appeared above its house. Many mountains opened, and in one of these there was seen a column covered with Hebrew script reading: “This is the hour of my birth!”  On the next day there fell from Heaven a goodly quantity of manna and precious stones; at other places, howsoever, snakes and other horrible creatures. When the child was questioned as to the meaning of this, it made answer: that the precious stones stand for the supreme delight of those who will keep his commandments, the snakes for the martyrdom and castigation of the disobedient. Adoration of this infant has already begun because it has performed great miracles, awakening the dead and making the blind to see and the lame to walk. The populace is being encouraged by a bare-footed friar, who alleges that this is the true Son of God. For the sake of brevity I must omit further reports which do not sound very credible. It is said that the Rabbis have come to the conclusion that this is the child of Perdition, the Antichrist.

142. War on the Roman Bandits
        Rome
        25 April 1592
    When Mario Sciarra, the noblest chief of the bandits, arrived at a village not far from Velletri and found no victuals there, he petitioned the towns of Piceno and Norcia to supply him therewith. They sent answer that they wished to negotiate with Mario in person; but he sent one of his nephews to them, and him they shot dead. For this reason Mario went into Piceno, killing most of the inhabitants and sacking the whole place. He has also pillaged several of the neighbouring villages, and in one of them he caused the burgomaster to be hanged. In the vicinity of Tivoli, Mario Sciarra met a company of soldiers and fought with them. Thirty of their umber stood their ground and as many again were caught and hanged. This is the reprisal for refusing to recognize Sciarra as king of the Campagna. For this reason on Tuesday last Don Francesco Aldobrandino and the son of Marchese Malatesta set forth from here to Frascati with a goodly gathering of the inhabitants, and there joined forces with a number of soldiery to take the field against the bandits. They showed themselves fearlessly in the open with flying banners, drums and rack-waggons in fair number. Some were on horseback and others afoot. Near Livreto there appeared three hundred bandits who did some skirmishing with Delfino. He is reported to be sorely wounded. Leonessa in the Abruzzi, a place belonging to the Duke of Parma, was likewise invaded by the bandits, secretly assisted, so the rumour goes, by the peasantry. But, when this became known, those who had given help were thrown out of the windows as traitors to the country.
        Rome, the 9 May 1592
    The bandits who have been marauding in the Papal States for some time past, have finally made their escape in the direction of Aquila and Ascoli. Presumably the Spaniards, who were to have held the passes at the frontier, put up no resistance. The tale goes that a papal captain permitted himself to be bribed with money and allowed the bandits to escape. The Pope has issued orders that they must be refused passage throughout the Papal States, so that they do not return at the time of harvest and devastate the corn in the fields. To that end the Romans have offered to supply the money for three hundred mounted cavalry to fight them.
        Rome, 16th day of May 1592
    Last Saturday a vast number of soldiery proceeded from here to Tivoli in order there to join issue with other armies against the bandits who are making great depredations. They descended at night on Luparella in Apulia where they murdered six hundred people and the Bishop, and made off with their spoil, which is estimated at over a million. In Sessano they commandeered food and drink, driving the cattle away with them. Civitanova they burned to the ground, slaying about sixty persons. From there they pursued their way to Foggia, where they intended to steal the large sums of money that were kept at the toll-house. Had they succeeded in their enterprise they would have come away with great booty. Another band of brigands marched to Ascoli with their captain, Bachieratto, so that they might capture the Governor Visconti by night. This they failed to achieve, but they invaded a place near Montalto, where they did seventy persons to death in a gruesome fashion. Mario Sciarra is for the nonce near Norcia with a strong contingent of his bandits.

143. Nuptials at the Court of the King of Poland
        Cracow
        May 1592
        background: Letter concerning the Royal Wedding in Cracow, which is to be held on the 26 May 1592
    From Breslau. This day a merchant arrived here from Cracow, where he has been staying for a fortnight. He reports that the future Queen of Poland is at the time resting in Pless, but will arrive in Cracow the coming Tuesday, the 26th day of May. The Queen is diligently practising Italian dances, as the King, likewise, is being instructed therein daily by a Polish gentleman who has lived for a long time in Italy and France.
    His Majesty has ordered a masquerade which will cost over sixty thousand ducats. Fifty persons have been commanded to appear therein. They are to have their faces disguised in such fashion that each one shows that of another person and not his own, in order that none of them may be recognized. The Queen in persona will perform Italian dances, and gold-embroidered robes only will be worn for the masque.
    All the burgesses and merchants will appear in the German dress, which is in many colours. Their coats, ornamented with silver and white loops and buttons, will be a gay sight. They will all go out in procession to meet the Bible, and the nobility nor the merchants have allowed themselves to be seen arrayed thus. Six black and six white bears are to draw the bridal coach. Another coach is to be drawn by six stags. The white bears will be made to dance and thus there will be sufficient drollery with the wild animals. The merchant also reported that he had been in the King’s bedchamber. It is very spacious and the royal bedstead is in the middle thereof. It has a velvet curtain and velvet-covered chairs stand around it. On the bed there lies a sleeping-rug lined with velvet and sables. The Royal Bride is portrayed in this chamber, wearing a white and silver robe, and she looks at you with a laughing mouth, so that the King, as he looks at her picture, has to laugh likewise.

144. Injunction against Merry-Making
unknown
        6 October 1592
            background: Extract from an Order written by the Most Excellent Count Octavian Fugger, issued by him with regard to the abolition of all festivities.
    In the present grievous times, with death rampant, wars, disunion and tribulations, the perversion and decay of the land and the people as well as the shedding of Christian blood wax ever more disastrous. The monstrous undertakings of the Arch-Enemy of the name of Christ show that the prayers we have been offering up for the averting of these dangers and misfortunes do not suffice. It therefore behoves and well befits every one of us, as it is only meet that all should abstain from all worldly luxuries and joy. It is therefore my command that at the very earliest moment you should affix in my name (forasmuch as authority is vested in me) mandates on all the church doors with the sexton’s seal thereon, forbidding most forcibly, at the risk of chastisement, all public festivities, such as singing, whistling, dancing, masques, promenading in the streets and other worldly merry-making. For all these my permission is withdrawn until further notice. With regard to weddings, I will herewith agree to their celebration provided this be done with all modesty, to the accompaniment of muted string music. I request you to call together all priests in my name and inform them that on the Sunday on which they shall have the aforementioned mandate, it is to be affixed and published and that they are not only to read it out from the chancel, but also to exhort their parishioners seriously to live according to its injunctions. Transgressions will be punished firstly with admonitions, and should these fail with other adequate measures. With this, God speed.

145. Auxiliary Armies against the Turks
        Venice
        23 October 1592
        background: List of the assistance, both in unmounted and mounted troops, promised to His Majesty the Emperor by the highest potentates and princes in Italy for the impending expedition against the Turks in the coming year, 1593.
                                Foot.     Horse.
His Holiness the Pope gives     . . . .   3,000        500
His Majesty the King of Spain gives all this from the
    Kingdom of Naples   . . . .   6,000     1,500
The Duke of Ferrara gives   . . . .   2,000        500
The Duke of Urbino gives    . . . .   2,000        200
The Duke of Mantua gives    . . . .   1,000        400
Amounting in foot and horse to  . . . 14,000      3,100
    The aforesaid Papal Holiness, actuated by the highest zeal, has also made a large grant of money for the duration of the war against the Turks.
    What the Grand Duke of Florence will do or send will be important, as will also be the assistance from other Italian Princes, which is not recorded herein. The above-mentioned auxiliary armies contributed by these Princes will be in readiness during the coming spring in Croatia to march against the hereditary foe.

146. Executions in Saragossa
        Saragossa
        11 November 1592
    On the 19th day of October at 5 o’clock of the evening there were executed here: Juan de Luna, Don Diego de Heredia, Francisco de Ayerbe, Dionysio Perez de San Juan and Pedro de Fuerdes. In the first place, according to old usage, they were led, all except Fuerdess, through the streets of Saragossa on horseback. Don Francisco and Don Diego were in black woollen penitential garb and long black cloaks, the horses being swathed in black saddle-cloths. Ayerbe and Dionysio Perez were also led on horseback in black penitential robes, but their steeds had no saddlecloths. Pedro de Fuerdes was dragged in advance of them on a bundle of straw by two horses. On the market-place a scaffolding had been erected out of boards, and in the midst thereof a small railing; before this they were made to kneel. This scaffolding was covered with black cloth. Don Juan de Luna had his head cut off from the front and Don Diego from the back, Ayerbe and Dionysio Perez merely had their throats cut, then they were laid down and left to die by inches. Pedro de Fuerdes they strangled with a rope. When he was dead he was quartered and the four quarters hung out in the streets of Saragossa. Don Juan de Luna’s head was affixed to the royal town hall, that of Don Diego on the city gate, that of Francisco de Ayerbe at the prison, because he had removed Perez by force from there and led him away. Don Pedro de Fuerdes’ head was fixed on one of the city gates.
    Upon the ensuring day, the 20th, the Inquisition held its examination in the market-place. This lasted from 7 o’clock in the morning until 8 o’clock in the evening. Eight people were arraigned for sedition and condemned to death. They were executed on the 24th. At the same time the portrait of Antonio Perez was brought to this trial and on account of his heresy and sodomy burnt with prisoners who had been sentenced to the stake. Besides these, twenty to twenty-five other persons from Saragossa were also tried: some of them were flogged, others expelled from the country or sent to the galleys.

147. The Jesuits in Prague
        Prague
        10 January 1593
    During the week that is just past a printed book has been offered here publicly for sale, which a learned Italian from Florence, of the name of Butius Fidelinius, has had printed and dedicated to His Holiness the present Pope. In this volume he adduces over a hundred probable reasons why not only the Christians, but also the Turks, the Jews, and in short all peoples, although they may not believe in Christ, shall be saved. But the Christians will most likely experience greater joys and honours after the Resurrection than the unbelievers. This book was purchased by many with great amazement and horror. Especially because he states therein that his views are likewise pleasing to several Jesuits and cardinals in France and Italy. Butius boasts that he discussed this with His Holiness the present Pope, when he was still in Poland. The opinion is held that the Jesuits should lose no time in refuting the arguments of this book. Yesterday, Sunday, one of them delivered a sermon on the Wedding Feast of Cana, and when he told all manner of good jests and stories on the subject of women’s sweetness towards men, the congregation several times laughed so loudly that he could scarcely proceed. On that account the other Jesuits are but ill pleased with him and intend to transfer him to another place. But the ladies of the Court are loth to let him depart and it is feared there may be trouble if the Jesuits persist in sending him away. He is held in high esteem by the courtiers, who last Christmas collected and presented to him so much in money, wines, spices and black Florentine cloth that it amounted to no less than twelve hundred thalers. It is desired to give him a church, St. Thomas by name, on the Kleinseite, and to expel from the monastery attached thereto all the Italian monks, especially as one of them is said to have seduced the daughter of a citizen.

148. The Retinue of the Archduke Ernest
unknown
        1593
    background: List of all the high and low officials, officers and servants of the new Court of the Royal Highness and the Archduke Ernest of Austria:
    Lord High Steward: Count Karl zu Hohenzollern, Councillor of His Roman Imperial Majesty. Marshal of the Court: Herr Ferdinand Albrecht von Hoyos. Master of the Horse: Wolf Ehrenreich, Herr zu Schwarzenau. Cup-Bearers: Gilbert von Sombenia, Herr Lienhard Count von Bilsarin, two commoners. Carvers: three commoners and Siegmund, Baron von Spaur. Banadiers: a commoner and Erasmus von Sandoir. Dapifers: ten. Dapifers Stewards: two. Chief Keeper of the Silver: Rudolf von Crois. Under-Keeper of the Silver: one. Court Servant: Alexander, a Scotsman. Couriers: two. Captain of the Arquebusiers: Karl, Baron von Harrach. Arquebusiers with their fourrier and trumpeter: sixty-two. Captain of the Halberdiers: Hans, Baron von Mahler. Halberdiers: twenty-three. Halberdier Watchman: one. Chaplain Almoner: one. Chaplain-in-Ordinary and Chaplain: two. Sacristan: one. Sacristan for the Chapel: one. Trumpeters: seven. Army Drummer: one. Comptroller of the Court: one. Alms-Holder: one. Silver Cleaners: two. Silver Washer: one. Stable Door Keepers: two. Quarter-master: one. Court Couriers: four. Kitchen Master: one. Keeper of the Cellar and the Lights: two. Cellar Binders: two. Assistant to the Keeper of Lights: one. Pastry Baker: one. Kitchen Clerk: one. Buyer: one. Butchers: two. Cooks: two. Master Cooks: three. Under-Bakers: four. Pastrycooks: two. Roasting-master: two. Flavourers: three. Kitchen Waiters: two. Kitchen Boys: five. Wood Cutter: one. Keeper of the Kitchen Door: one. Stewards: two. Market Carriers: four. Seamstress and Linen-Laundress: one. Mouth Washer: one.
    Chief Chamberlains: Ernst, Baron von Harrach; Herr Hans von Molard. Chamberlains: Herr Hans Breuner; Count Wolf von Oettingen; Herr Albrecht Fugger; Count von Montecucoli. Chancellor: Herr Sebastian Neustermacher zum Winddegghof. Councillor and Court Secretary of His Roman Imperial Majesty and five clerks. Chief Master of the Wardrobe: one. Under-Master of the Wardrobe: one. Physician-in-Ordinary: one. Under-Barber: one. Apothecary: one. Private Courier: one. Heater of the Palace: one. Keepers of the Doors: two. Table-Layers: two. Master: one. Private Tailor: one. Court Tailor: one. Bootmaker-in-Ordinary: one. Private Goldsmith: one. Armourer: one. Bodyguard Halberdiers: four. Chief Master of the Horse: Maximilian, Baron von Dietrichstein. Pages: thirteen. Tutor and Preceptor of the Pages: one. Dancing Master of the Pages: one. Servant of the pages: one. Ostler: one. Ostler’s Clerk: one. Riding Master: one. Groom: one. Court Smiths: two. Court Saddler: one. Harness-Maker: one. Spur-Maker: one. Gunsmith: one. Lackeys: eight. Stable Grooms: seventeen. Coachmen: twenty-six. Stable boy: one. Harnessers: two. Court Sweeper: one. Chaise-bearer: one. Provost of the Court: one. Valets: two. Makes a total of four hundred and eighty persons and four hundred and eighty-six horses.

149. Christening at the Court of Poland
        Warsaw
        7 July 1593
    Last Sunday, on the 4th day of this month, the royal christening was held in Warsaw after Vespers as follows: First the guests and all the officials of the Court went into the church, then the King followed. On his right hand there walked the papal Nuncio, on the left the Envoy of His Imperial Majesty. Then came the Swedish Princess, the King’s sister, who held the child in her two hands in a cradle most beautifully and daintily covered. On her right she had the Chancellor and on her left the Wojwode Adamovski. Since the Swedish lady found some difficulty in carrying her burden, the two said gentlemen assisted her. Thereupon followed the Queen. On her right walked the Envoy of Graz and on her left the Wojwode Woyzelinski, then came the young Queen, who had been confined but six weeks before; accompanied by Cardinal Count Radziwill on her right, and the Treasurer of the Polish Crown on her left. Then followed all the ladies-in-waiting of the three Queens, and as it was a beauteous day, all was most gay and sumptuous to behold. In the church the Royal Princess was given in baptism the names Anna Maria by the Cardinal Radziwill. The sponsors were: the Roman Imperial Majesty, who bestowed a necklace valued at fourteen hundred thalers as a christening gift; and the other godfather, the Envoy of Graz, who has presented, in the name of the mother of the Queen, another necklace which is nearly equal in value to the former; and the third sponsor, the old Queen, has given a bracelet and a rosary, which, surely, was of more worth than a wreath of marjoram. After the christening a short address was given, after which they all returned from church in the same order. Thereupon there took lace a private banquet which was over so promptly that every one came home by daylight.

150. Henry IV becomes a Catholic
        Lyons
        13 August 1593
    We have received tidings in what manner the King of Navarre on his birthday, the 28th day of July, was pronounced at St. Denis to be a member of the Church of Rome. Thereupon, it was urged on the Princes of the League by the common people in Paris as well as by parliament that peace should be made. Although the Spanish Ambassador and the Legate of the Pope had declaimed against this, nevertheless a general peace for three months was declared. It is supposed that peace will become effective thereafter. Preachers shout and rave against this from the chancel and make an outcry that the King will not keep faith with the Catholics. In Vivarais, Languedoc and other places round here this peace has already been hailed with great rejoicing. The King had arrived at his country seat of La Roquette near Paris, which belongs to the former Chancellor, and the Princes were agreed to come to meet him from Paris. But the Spanish Ambassador and the Papal Legate like it not and were ready to depart. A courier has been dispatched hither from Madrid reporting that the fleet from New Spain and Peru has safely reached port on the 28th of last month. The treasure is priced all in all at ten and a half millions, but nothing whatsoever is heard about the two missing ships from Calicut and the galleon from Malacca, so that it is feared that harm has come to them and that they may well be lost. This would be a great disaster to many. May God grant that good news may still be obtained with regard to them. The Spaniards and the Portuguese will then flourish exceedingly, especially if the ship that is awaited from India also arrives safely.

151. Trial of Herr Ladislaus von Popel
        Prague
        20 October 1593
    The day before yesterday Herr Ladislaus von Popel was cited before the Tribunal. He, however, had made his escape the night before, and, according to information, is said to have taken the road to Saxony. Yesterday in the presence of His Imperial Majesty and of all the officers sentence was pronounced upon him, in the Chamber of Knights. He is declared forfeit of life, honour and estate. This will be a sad blow to his respected and noble friends, who will also have good reason to feel it deeply. His spouse, his son and his two small daughters prostrated themselves to-day at the feet of His Majesty. But they will not achieve much, for most grievous accusations are brought forward against Herr Popel that through his fault the last Parliament was of so little profit. His Majesty is likewise in possession of the obnoxious document which he had composed.
    Postscript in another hand:
    I cannot conceal from my own kindly Master that His Imperial Majesty has begun sore quarrels and recriminations with several gentlemen on account of the self-same Diet and that he takes these unworthy matters more to heart than the war at the Hungarian frontier. The Governor is in His Majesty’s bad books. Throughout several days there has been held in the Chamber of Knights and the Hall of Justice, in the presence of His Majesty, a strict inquisition anent the originator of this state of affairs. Thus there came to be impungned a nobleman, one Wreschowetz, who put the blame on the old Herr Ladislaus Popel. His Majesty is so bitter against this nobleman that he is minded to deal very strictly with him. Kolowrat and Herr Christoph Popel have fostered this feeling greatly. When Herr Ladislaus was informed thereof he rode yesterday out of the town. To-day there is a horrible outcry anent his losing his life, his honour and his property.

152. Bringing in of the Turkish War Booty to Vienna
        Prague
        18 January 1594
    On the 11th of this month the booty from the victory near Weissenburg reached Vienna. It was delivered to the Court by our gentlemen thus. First came the chief of the arsenal of Raab and at his side there walked two Viennese servants. Thereupon were drawn the thirty Turkish cannon which had been taken from the enemy. Following these came three Turkish horses with gilt saddles, upholstered in velvet, whose headgear was of silver and gilt. Then were carried past the twenty-two Turkish flags, among them three principal flags with large silver and gilt buttons. Then were brought gilt sabres, daggers, morions, Janissaries’ bonnets, Turkish headgear, two marvellous bows and arrows, Turkish round shields as are worn by Begs and pashas. Likewise two long Turkish knives, two Turkish silver and gilt water bottles, ten Janissaries’ drums and many other objects. The two horses which were led out first are for the Roman Imperial Majesty, and the third is destined for the Archduke Mathias. When the cannon was installed before the Burg, a few artificers were detailed thereto. When the march past was over a cannon was fired.

153. Trial of Herr Georg von Popel
        Prague
        19 April 1594
    Most Honoured Gracious Sir:
    Since my last letter His Imperial Majesty has had presented to Herr Georg Popel, former Governor of Bohemia, a script, in which there were various conditions, to which he surrendered at discretion. There was likewise included an oath of peace in which was recounted what crime he had committed and what severe punishment he had deserved. This document he kept for a few days, begging that a Jesuit be called unto him, so that he might be heard in confession and make his peace with God. As the Jesuit reports to a high personage, he hath made loud protestation of his innocence during this confession on all points of which he was accused, before God, his conscience and his eternal salvation. According to this, he was not minded to burden his soul and conscience, and likewise his honour and the good name of his house, with a confession that had been forced from him. May His Majesty, as his most gracious Sovereign and Master, do with him as he pleases, for he makes most humble submission to him, and craves for mercy and compassion. Thereupon and on the same day, after going to confession. Thereupon and on the same day, after going to confession, he begged that a long petition be handed to the officers and also to the Imperial Majesty, which was composed for him by a Jesuit in Komotau, where he hath built a stately college for that Order. In this he craves that the conditions imposed upon him be graciously lightened. This petition is reported to have incensed His Imperial Majesty and the officers still further, for he recants his former confession, on the strength of which His Majesty accepted his surrender and withdrew the legal proceedings which had been begun against him. For if judgment had been pronounced, it would have cost him his life. It was decided thereupon to convey him, as a prisoner, to his castle of Litschau. There a prison was built for him, which had formerly been the dogs’ kennels. All the windows therein were walled up, and only two holes, which were guarded by double iron gratings, left at the top for the light. Around and above this jail, which consists of a small room and a closet, there has been built a passage, wherein the warders, of whom there are twenty, patrol up and down. There have also been erected two iron doors and a wooden portal so that none can go into the prison without permission from the Captain of the Guard. His name is Adam Haslauer, and some years ago he was dispossessed by Herr von Popel of his estates under the cloak of righteousness, so that he was in sore poverty and distress, and for a time had to take service at Innsbruck with the Archduke Ferdinand. The opinion is held that on account of this old enmity and the knavish treatment meted out to him by Herr von Popel, he will guard him with additional zeal and assiduity. The prison having been prepared on the night of Friday last, Popel was transported from his abode to Litschau in a coach, escorted by mounted men with sixty horses and seventy musketeers. When he came into the courtyard his old foe, the Captain, received him with but ill grace and conducted him straight to the prison. When he was about to enter, he began to weep bitterly and said: “Oh, is it not a matter for compassion, that I, poor, misfortunate man, whereas I formerly lived in honour and comfort, should now have to consume my life in the former abode of my dogs and kennel grooms, for even they were discontent with their dwelling place! It afflicts me still more that I should be delivered into the power and the hands of my former foe! Oh, what are human life, worldly pomp and riches! It is cursed avarice that hath led me astray. Yet I must grant this punishment is well merited. Howsoever, I shall be neither the last nor the first who is thus punished, and perhaps there be others who will come after me." This was understood to signify that more people are involved with him in this, and these, as is bruited about, are to be brought to justice. Five thousand thalers have been fixed yearly for the upkeep of the prison and the warders, and the prisoner has been granted daily five ordinary meals and the customary draught of wine. Nothing has yet been done to the confiscated property.
    When Herr Popel was being led away in the night, his two daughters raised exceeding bitter lamentation and wanted to depart with their father. They were granted permission to accompany him as far as Litschau. They will remain interned there a few days and then be placed in a convent until the Diet meets again. Thereafter Herr Trautson will take them into his house and have them properly educated. For His Imperial Majesty intends of his mercy to bestow on them a stately dowry from the confiscated property. Since, according to Bohemian law, it cannot be said that Herr Popel has lost his honour, whereas no judgment was pronounced against him, it is opined that there will be no aversion felt in regard to marriage with his daughters; they are said to be fine and comely maidens. This is the advantage and profit which were gained by Herr Popel when he surrendered at discretion before sentence was pronounced against him. His Majesty, however, is so much incensed at Popel’s recantation that he is willed to have the whole lawsuit and the investigations read publicly and the sentence published so that each one may hear and convince himself that His Majesty is entitled to undertake this, and far more, against him. The chief officers of the land are to gather here, even before the departure of His Majesty to make choice of another governor and a chancellor. A stadtholder will likewise be installed, because His Majesty wishes to be present in Parliament and to go to Vienna from Regensburg and then return hither again. For this affair with Popel may bring forth other difficulties still. In the last days there has been circulated a script in which it is said that one should be careful that the ashes (for this in Bohemian is the meaning of the name Popel) do not hold a few sparks from which there might spring a noxious fire for the crown of Bohemia and against the house of Austria. May God Almighty kindly guard against this. Otherwise this matter is not willingly spoken about here, for the Bohemian noblemen and those belonging to the knighthood feel somewhat affronted. There may be also some who aver that Georg Popel did everything for the good of his country and for the liberty of the Bohemian States, likewise that those in authority, in making an example of him, may have overreached themselves and infringed on the privileges of the nobles. But such people will be wary for fear that they may be made responsible hereafter.

154. Market Prices in Vienna
        Vienna
        17 September 1594
            List of prices of which things are to be bought nowadays in Vienna. 
    A bottle of old wine for ten Kreuzers, this year’s vintage for eight, on the land for four, five, and six kreuzers—yet good wine. A pound of meat can well be had in town for two kreuzes. A small loaf of bread for a white groschen—twelve pence—outside for sixpence. It is so large and white that one could hardly believe it. If the Danube were wider, it would be easier to import. As far as other eatables are concerned, everything costs a pretty penny. Oats a measure, eight to nine florins; corn a measure, fifteen to sixteen. The shock of straw costs six florins, the cord of wood eighteen. Of such matters there is no lack in anything. Candles are only to be bought the pound for five kreuzers and this with sore difficulty. A measure of wheat costs nineteen florins. Three quarts of oats cost nineteen kreuzers and a measure of corn fourteen florins.

155. Great Bankruptcies in Seville
        Antwerp
        15 October 1594
    This week there have arrived here two couriers, who were dispatched hither in great haste from Seville. They bring letters of the 20th day of September, in which there is written that a Spaniard, Pedro Perez Pardo, has failed for one hundred thousand, some aver one hundred and fifty thousand ducats. He is said to have drawn large sums on Martin Perez Barron and on Antonio Gallo of Salamanca in promissory notes. They have been informed that they are not to accept the bills of exchange which are expected daily by the Ordinary from Spain. Such insolvencies and difficulties are to be expected considering these ruinous days of war. These same letters contain news from Seville that the fleet from New Spain and Peru is expected there within eighteen or twenty days. It is said to carry seventeen millions of silver, and it is unknown how much gold, as well as thirteen hundred arobas of carmine and all kinds of other wares. One hundred and seventy ships there be in all. May the Lord permit that this fleet land in happiness and safety. This will be of much comfort to the traders of Spain and of other places, for the prospects are but poor and fraught with peril for the merchants.

156. Wondrous Tidings from Berlin and Leipzig
        Berlin
        23 December 1594
    Dear Lady Mother:
    I cannot hide from you that a few days ago the ten-year-old daughter of a God-fearing burgess had a vision by night in her sleeping chamber, which was suddenly filled with a great radiance. Shortly thereafter there appeared unto her the form of a beautiful youth, all clad in white, who held a sword in his hand. He quoth: “Listen, child of man, and fear not nor be horrified! I am a good angel sent by God to the intent that thou mayest preach before the high authorities and bid them know that the Lord will afflict the German lands as He hath done to those of His people the Jews, when they would not abandon their great conceit, their lust and their sins. For just as He is gracious, longsuffering and pitiful, so does He come in His wrath and anger to punish mankind.”
    This child had but the day before been for the first time to the Lord’s Table and although she did not speak much otherwise, she fearlessly repeated this angelical command before many people. Thus do the good angels preach that we must do penance and eternally offer praise to the gracious Lord for this consoling warning. On the other hand the bad angels preach most fearsomely and horribly in the Neumark. In a small town, Freiburg by name, evil spirits have possessed over one hundred and fifty pesons, to which the preachers and also our friends testify.
    Some few days ago a bad angel was also in Spandau, hardly two miles from here. There he made seven persons to be possessed, out of whom spoke the evil enemy. Many God-fearing people have heard this.
    When the eclipse of the moon took place on the night of the 19th to the 20th days of October at five of the morn, there were seen in the skies strange rays and likewise other signs. Through this it can well be assumed that God will punish us with various plagues, unless we do become converted in time and do real penance for our sins. May the Almighty provide for us in His fatherly fashion, not according to our deserts but according to His Mercy. Your beloved son, MAGISTER HERMANUS LIPHORPIUS, Rector.
            Leipzig, 25th day of December 1594
    What my brother wrote from Berlin and Spandau is, alack, but too true. The burgesses of Spandau have since then collected all high collars and burned them in the open market-place. In Berlin, likewise, it has been forbidden to wear high collars and the bows which women flaunt on their skirts. Two days ago, one of our servitors arrived from Silesia and he says that three weeks ago a mountain erupted close to a little town, Goldberg by name. Smoke issued therefrom and rose into the air; it turned upon the town, lifted the roof from two houses and a piece of the church, and then receded into the mountain. In the Striegau various people who were dead and buried have reappeared. They torment and frighten the people. It was decided to exhume one of them, cut off his head and bury him under the gallows, which was done, but it proved of no avail; he appeared as heretofore. It was then decided to exhume him once more and to burn him. After this he appeared no longer, and all the others did likewise vanish.

157. Attempted Murder of Henry IV
        Antwerp
        2 January 1595
    A letter from Paris of the 29th brings news that the King of Navarre all but perished in the palace of Madame de Lioncourt. For as he was returning the salute of one who had made obeisance to him, a youth between seventeen and eighteen years of age essayed to stick a knife into his throat. But the thrust went too high and pierced the right cheek, whereby the King has lost two of his teeth. The handle of the knife remained cleft between the teeth. How this is going to develop we shall know by the following letters.

158. Copy of the Judgment and Sentence passed by the Parliament in Paris upon Jean
Paris
unknown
            Chatel, a scholar who studied in the College of Jesuits, on account of the horrible murder which he dared to attempt against the King’s Person. Also the sentence passed upon the Jesuits, who have been banished from the Kingdom of France as Corrupters of Youth, Destroyers of the Peace and Enemies of the King and State.
    The Parliament has examined the criminal suit, which was begun by the Provost of the Royal House and thereafter was continued at the request of the Royal Procurator-General against Jean Chatel, who has studied in the College of Jesuits at Clermont and now lies in jail. Parliament has given hearing to the confession of Jean Chatel and of the Priest of the Society of Jesu, Jean Guerette, former tutor of Chatel, as well as that of Pierre Chatel and Dionysia Hasdrat, his parents, and to the charge of the Royal Procurator-General and has found: Jean Chatel has been recognized guilty of the crime against the divine and temporal Majesty and is condemned as follows: He must make public penance before the doors of the church in Paris, naked in a shirt, lie on his knees, and hold in his right hand a burning candle, two pounds in weight. He must say and confess that he planned the inhuman and horrible murder against the King, in most malicious and treacherous fashion, and did wound him in the face with a knife. He most likewise confess that during his trial, he did say, according to false and cursed instructions which he had received, that it was permissible to kill kings, and that Henry IV did not belong to the Church as long as he had not received confirmation thereof from the Pope. He must manifest remorse and sorrow and crave forgiveness from God and the King. When this shall have taken place he will be conducted to the Place de la Grève in the cart of infamy, and there be riven with tongs in the arms and the legs. His right hand will hold the knife with which he was desirous of committing the murder, and this will be lopped off. Then he will be rent asunder by four horses, his members and his body shall be thrown into the fire and his ashes strewn to the winds.
    Moreover, Parliament has declared that all his estate is to be confiscated and surrendered to the King. Parliament likewise forbids any one, of whatsoever condition he be, by fear of punishment for lese-majesty, to repeat publicly or privately the offensive and rebellious words of Jean Chatel, which are not according to the word of God and have been condemned through the holy decrees as heretical and accursed. It further recognizes that the priests and alumni of the College of Clermont, and all others who call themselves followers of the Society of Jesu, destroyers of the peace and enemies of the King and of the State, have, within three days after the promulgation of this judgment, to leave the city of Paris and all other towns and places wherever they may have their colleges, and within fourteen days to leave the kingdom. Should they still be found within the confines of the kingdom after this time has elapsed they shall be punished for the crime of lese-majesty, their movable and immovable property to be employed for works of charity and distributed according to the findings of Parliament. Moreover it is forbidden to all subjects of the King to send students to other Jesuit colleges outside the kingdom. Parliament recognizes further that the present decree is to be executed by all the courts and prefects of this district. It also orders all the prefects and governors to carry out the execution within a fixed period. The representatives of the Procurator-General are to keep the matter under their control and to report within a month to Parliament, on fear of losing their office, as to their success.

159. A Russian Embassy in Prague
        Prague
        18 August 1595
            background: Extract from the letter of a good friend.
    The Muscovite Embassy arrived here last Wednesday. They were received most splendidly and fittingly and escorted with four hundred horses. This Muscovite Embassy came ordinarily dressed and after the fashion of gipsies, since it was raining, and it would have been a sad pity had they been attired in sumptuous raiment. They have not yet had audience from His Majesty and therefore receive no one. They have brought hither some seventy coaches laden with delectable presents. They are kept free of expense and most lavishly entertained.

160. The Pope’s Pardon for Henry IV
        Rome
        5 September 1595
    Last Sunday morning at 8 o’clock the Pope caused himself to be carried in pontifical vestments to the square in front of the church of St. Peter. Nearly all the Cardinals present and a great number of prelates and gentlemen followed him thither. When he had taken his place with the Cardinals, there soon appeared the proxies of the King of Navarre, Messieurs Duperron and d’Ossat. They prostrated themselves before the Pope, kissed his feet and tendered to him their letters of introduction, in which the absolution which had oft been craved before, was submissively craved once again. The Pope showed himself favourably inclined to this petition, but he first commanded that a document be read out to the said proxies, in which it was declared that he was right willing to absolve the King, but that after receiving absolution the King was to say his rosary daily, attend Mass and conform to other spiritual exercises. Thereupon the aforesaid proxies first foreswore all heresies in the name of His Majesty, and publicly professed themselves to be of the Roman Faith. They likewise promised to carry through the conventions which had been agreed upon, and accepted the penance imposed on them.
    Thereupon the two Psalms Miserere and De Profundis were sung and the Pope gave the absolution and added that he had permitted the King ingress to the Church Militanf, and was willing to allow him likewise to be received into the Church Triumphant, after had shown himself proficient in the spiritual exercises that were pleasing to God. Then the Cardinal Sancta Severina conducted the proxies to the church of St. Peter, which had been closed hitherto, and there they knelt before the high altar, took their oath and made their prayer and their act of thanksgiving. They likewise swore that His Majesty would himself execute all that he had been bidden to do before an apostolic Legate. They then took leave of the Cardinal, betook themselves to the church of St. Luigi and heard Mass there. Afterwards they gave a stately banquet in their quarters to the gentlemen who had accompanied them. On this and the following days a cannon was fired on the Castello degli Angeli and various other joyful entertainments were likewise arranged.

161. The Russian Embassy in Prague
        Prague
        9 September 1595
    On the last day of August at 2 o’clock in the afternoon, the Grand-Ducal Embassy arrived here with fifty coaches. On each one there were chests covered with red leather, which were delivered and placed in the great hall. On the 1st and 2nd days of September the presents were taken out from the chests. When this was done His Imperial Majesty gave the members of the Embassy a banquet. At this they partook so freely of brandy and heavy Hungarian wines that they had partly to be carried home. The presents consist of one thousand sables, which, according to what people are telling us, are each worth forty thalers, further, five hundred and nineteen martens, and one thousand black fox, three thousand beaver, three thousand doeskins, and one thousand wolf furs. These wares were covered with seventy-four elk skins. It is also said that an offering from the Grand Duke is on the way, consisting of wax and flax, to which the present gifts cannot be compared! May God grant this!
    On the 3rd of this month there was held a banquet, to which His Majesty had commanded the attendance of his musicians and many distinguished gentlemen. All these were made to drink the health of the Grand Duke in brandy, which was greatly distasteful to them, especially to Rosenberg, who had never yet tasted it.

162. Peasants’ War in Upper Austria
        Vienna
        13 November 1596
    With regard to the Peasants’ War in Linz the tale goes round that the soldiery has again been skirmishing with the peasants near Freistadt. Six hundred men on both sides are said to have fallen, but victory remained with the peasants, who pursued the lansquenets as far as Freistadt. The Upper Austrian province is reported to have craved help from us in foot and horse. Two couriers arrived yesterday bringing with them a script according to which, if no help is sent, the nobles of Upper Austria will be in the utmost peril. For this reason Herr von Königsegg will be dispatched thither to-morrow with a troop of horsemen. Herr von Starhemberg is said to have lost three hundred riders in this affray.
    There be posted up everywhere notices for the levying of troops, for the peasants are waxing ever stronger. They are said to be encamped not far from here, forty thousand strong, near the Danube. One cannot wholly blame them, for they are sorely pressed with the new taxes which they cannot afford to pay. They have most stately and experienced leaders who keep strict discipline, so that much might be learned by us from them. Since all the towns in the country must needs send troops, those of Wels were but a short time ago attacked by the peasants and soundly trounced, but not killed. Only their armour and weapons were taken from them, and they were sent back. If this war were to continue the country would be ruined and fall into decay. May God prevent this upheaval!

163. English Pirates
        Rome
        8 April 1596
    Letters from the Spanish Court, dated the 8th day of March, report the arrival in Seville of three galleons laden with two million gold pieces and five hundred casks of crimson lake, which, the year before, remained behind in Porto Rico on their way from India. In Porto Rico five Spanish ships have run against two English vessels and captured one of these. When informed by the sailors that Drake with the rest of his fleet was not far away, two of the five Spanish ships again returned to Porto Rico. The other three were overtaken by Drake and burnt, whereupon he made bold to land near that spot. The inhabitants, however, put up resistance and killed about four hundred of his men, the famous French buccaneer, Zacaria, being among the number. Drake thereupon sailed for the Indies.

164. A Miracle in Jerusalem
        Venice
        10 April 1596
    A barefooted friar, who has just arrived here from Jerusalem, brings tidings that in the Holy City there has been discovered a hidden chapel without doors or windows, in which can be heard a wondrous harmony of angelic voices celebrating the Majesty of God. No one, however, dares touch this chapel or approach it.

165. A Meteor in Rome
        Rome
        27 April 1596
    On the evening of St. Mark’s Day there arose here a terrible storm which lasted for more than half an hour, and drove fear and trembling unto many. On the same evening a ball of fire appeared near the “Angels’ Bridge,” and floated eastward across the sky. It came with such an uproar that the earth began to quake. Then it disappeared forthwith.

166. Index Librorum Prohibitorum
        Rome
        1 June 1596
    Whereas many new heretical books are being printed, the titles of these have been collected in an Index and their publication has been definitely prohibited.

167. Panic at a Bull Fight
        Madrid
        6 July 1596
    A few days ago, the inhabitants of Toledo, according to their custom, have held a bull fight before His Majesty. A great multitude having collected, some evil young rogues suddenly set up the cry: “The houses are falling!”  Thereupon such panic arose among the people that they rushed out of them and betook themselves to the tablados or tribunes. This caused one of these to collapse, and several persons were hurt. The others fled without caps, hats or coats—the women without capes or slippers, only in scanty attire. In the meantime, some graceless ruffians arrived and carried off all they could lay hands on, especially plate and golden trinkets. This turmoil lasted for over an hour.

168. A Bad Omen
        Rome
        6 July 1596
    During these last days at about 2 o’clock in the morning a comet, with tail pointing towards the east, has appeared in the west. Rumour has it that this generally means the death of a great personage.

169. The Funeral of His Most Serene Highness Ferdinand, Archduke of Austria and Tyrol
        Innsbruck
        20 July 1596
    First of all there stepped forth various craftsmen and their guilds from the local Presbytery. In front of them strode the custodian of the Hospital, holding a candle protected by a shade. Then came one hundred patriarchs in black coats and smocks, each carrying a burning candle in his hand. Then came the venerable Council of Hall in mourning garb, with burning candles. Then came the honourable and wise Council from the princely town of Innsbruck, likewise with burning lights. Then followed the Town Clerk of Freiburg and the Town Clerk of Enzenstein. Then all the officials and the regimental and civilian scribes, together with the valets of His Most Serene Highness, the regimental secretaries and the gentlemen of the Capuchin Order, twelve of whom bore aloft a silver cross. They were followed by the Franciscans, the barefooted friars and the monks from Wilten. Then came the whole of the clergy with several of their vicars, twenty-four in all. Then the choristers and musicians of His Most Serene Highness, the Court Chaplain, the Court Preacher Antonius and the Father Almoner. Then nine prelates, the Suffragan Bishop of Brixen, the doctors and secretaries, the nobility, the military and financial Councillors, the Provincial Diet and the dapifers and grooms of the chamber of His Serene Highness, also the army kettledrums, swathed in black cloth. Then the flags—a light blue flag with the Hapsburg escutcheon and a stately black charger caparisoned in black with the coat of arms of Tyrol hanging on both sides. Then a yellow flag with the coat of arms of Tyrol; a beautiful red flag with the coat of arms of Württemberg and Swabia; a green taffeta flag with the coat of arms of Carniola; a fig-brown flag with the coat of arms of Styria; a double-width white taffeta flag with the coat of arms of Burgundy; a blue flag with the coat of arms of Austria; and an entirely golden flag with the full coat of arms of His Highness of blessed memory. Then there was led past a magnificent horse with silver-gilt trappings and a red velvet saddle. It was decked in front and behind with white feathers. Then came Herr Siegmund von Welsberg carrying a long black flag which trailed on the ground; then Herr Christoph von Welsberg bearing on a black velvet cushion the Golden Fleece. Herr von Kolowrat as a former Master of the Horse carried the gilt helmet with gorgeous peacock feathers. Then two gentlemen carried a large shield with different coats of arms embossed thereon; next was borne a beautiful gilt sword, and the Count of Hohenembs came next, carrying a silver-gilt sceptre. The Count of Nogarol bore the hat of the Archduke. Then came the ducal bier. It weighed about seven hundredweight, and twenty-eight noblemen supported it with much strain. Then followed His Eminence the Cardinal, the son of His Highness, the Archduke Mathias and the Ambassadors to His Highness. The Count of Lodron and Herr von Vrintz led the Archduchess, then came the young Archduchesses, their governess and the tiring-women. Then followed the Commander of the Life Guards, and the bodyguards of the Archduke Ferdinand. The procession lasted five hours and passed through the town, the suburbs, the fortifications and then into the new burial-ground.

170. The Baptism of Jews in Rome
        Rome
        5 August 1596
    These days a rich and prominent Jew, bent on some business with a monk in the Chiesa Nuova betook himself thither. This Father converted him in such wise to the Christian Faith, that the Jew at once sent for his wife, and questioned her, if she, likewise, would be received unto the Church. She declared that she was willing to do so, and the Jew has since remained with the aforementioned monk. His wife was confided to the care of a devout woman. The possessions of the Jew were confiscated at once by the order of the Law.

171. Murder Will Out
        Jena in Saxony
        12 September 1596
    In the electoral town of Dresden it occurred latterly that a tanner was called away from his house. During this time the executioner, who held commerce with him in skins, came into his house, and finding that the tanner was absent he assaulted his wife, violated her and cut off her head. When the tanner returned he knocked for a long time and as no one opened unto him, sought assistance from his neighbours. When, however, the dead woman was discovered they accused the husband and put him into prison. There he was cruelly tortured by the executioner, so that in his great agony he confessed to the murder. Thereupon he was condemned to die on the rack. As he was led forth undeservedly to execution and the executioner had already broken one of his legs and was going to break the other, the wheel caught the executioner by the neck so that he was unable to get away. As he was pinned in this position he confessed the deed and was taken into custody. He was confronted with the injured man. The tanner will be healed and great honour has been shown to him. The executioner still lies in prison. God allows nothing to remain concealed, and all things, whether great or small, always come to the light of day.
    Fourteen days ago, there happened at Halberstadt, eighteen miles away, a deplorable affair. A parson was called unto a woman in childbed to baptize her new-born infant, but when he was about to return to his home such a thunderstorm arose that he ran back to the woman’s house and remained there for two hours. In the meantime the accouchée and others with her fell asleep. Thereupon the parson seized the child and ran away with it. Shortly after the people awake and look round for the child. The father runs to the parson’s house and goes into it. As he enters the room he sees the parson standing before the table and the child cut in four parts in a cauldron. Thereupon he caused the parson to be taken prisoner. The latter confessed that had he had another quarter of an hour’s grace, neither corn nor wine nor the grass in the field would have remained, and everything on the ground would have perished. This, however, the good Lord prevented in His mercy and for that we must be grateful to Him.

172. Spanish Financial Policy
        Lyons
        19 September 1596
    King Philip of Spain intends to confiscate and keep for his own use and purpose the share of gold and silver belonging to different persons, which the fleet has just brought home. This comes to nearly ten millions, as shown below, and its confiscation will be detrimental to many.
    A record of what is due to each individual from the incoming fleet, which will be kept back by the Kind for his own profit:
                                Millions of Ducats
    Malvenda    . . . . .     1.7
    Suares  . . . . . .     1.05
    Ambrogio Spinola    . . . .     0.4
    Nicolo Fornari  . . . . .     0.6
    Nicolo Doria    . . . . .     1.0
    Sinibaldo Fiesco, Giovanni Battista Guidetti    .     0.8
    Simone Luic and Allessandro Sauli   . .     0.5
    Battista Serra  . . . . .     0.5
    Fuggeri . . . . .     2.0
    Detto Fuggeri per una partida fatta in Fiandra      1.3
        Total: 9 millions and 800,000 ducats.

173. The Sultan goes to War
unknown
unknown
            background: Tidings which were brought to Gran by the retainers of Herr von Kreckwitz.
    When the demise of Herr von Kreckwitz, the Ambassador to Turkey and of His Roman Imperial Majesty occurred, it was at first decided to put his retainers to death; but as they had tendered long and faithful service they were set at liberty in the following manner:
    On the 20th of June the Turkish Emperor set out from Constantinople with his vast army. On the 7th day of July the twenty-two retainers of Herr von Kreckwitz were taken from the Black Tower and delivered to the English Ambassador, Edward Burton, at Galatta. On the 13th day we arrived from Constantinople at Dothsichugh and thus on the 27th day at Philippopoli, an old and famous town.
    On the 1st of August we came to Sophia, on the 7th to Nish and on the 13th to Greek-Weissenburg. There we came upon the Emperor in all his might. He has a camp so large that it cannot be surveyed. On the 14th the Ambassador went to the Vesir-Pasha and kissed his feet, whereupon he released us, but bade us not to be as ungrateful as had been the Transylvanians. He has ordered us to convey to our Emperor tidings of the power of this All-Mightiest Emperor, which we had witnessed. On the 18th there were brought in thirty captured Hungarians, of whom two were killed and left lying on the square, for any one to see.
    On the 20th the Turkish Emperor moved his camp from Greek-Weissenburg.
    On the 14th the Emperor was publicly seen on a white stallion in a satin coat. On his turban he wore a black aigrette; on the 30th the Ambassador and his retinue having gorgeously attired themselves, waited on the Emperor early and paid their respects to him.
    That night we lay in Grosswardein, a Turkish fortress. On the 1st of September we saw the whole army on a green plain. That day the Emperor rode a brown horse. He ordered jugglers to perform in his presence, after which he entered a green coach and was driven thence. From the 6th to the 9th of September we rested quietly at Szegedin, a trade centre with a castle.
    On that day, the first tidings reached the Grand Turk that the Christians had taken Hatván by storm. Thereupon he quoth: “Let them take it now. When I come there I will recapture it all!”  We were in great danger of being massacred. Thereafter a captured Christian was brought in from Szolnok, who related how Hatván was seized and how over fifty thousand men had beleaguered it.
    On the 10th of September as we were marching off we beheld, on all sides, many burning villages, which the Tartars had set alight. On the 12th the Emperor pitched his camp at Szolnok. On the 15th he ordered it to be proclaimed that all Christian children should be registered, for he wanted to turn them into Janissaries, as he was in need of these. On two days he made a holiday for all his soldiery and a thousand aspri were given to each man.
    On the 17th we were sent away from the camp near Szolnok and on the 20th we reached Buda.
    On the 21st the interpreter betook himself to the Pasha of Ofen with the Emperor’s orders, whereupon he released our companions and had them brought to us.
    On the 23rd we went by boat to Ofen and in the evening we reached Waizen. As we sailed in our ship below the fortress the garrison took us for Turks and shot at us with a gun. The cannon ball fell half a fathom’s length from us into the water. Then we cried out and made signs to them.
    On the 25th we reached Gran.
    The Turkish Emperor Mehemed must be about thirty years old. His camp is estimated at five hundred thousand, but Christians and Turks who are well versed in matters of war assert that among them he has but a hundred thousand good warriors at the most. The rest are camel and donkey drivers and riff-raff.
    The chief Vizier, Ibrahim Pasha, is a Croat, Sokolli an alien.
    The Pasha of Aleppo was taken a prisoner at Erlau where he was beheaded.
    Hassan Pasha, Scharrar Mehemed Pasha and Mehemed Pasha are eunuchs.
    What other Pashas and Beglerbeghs there are from Anotolia—and there are many—is unknown to us.

174. The Peasant War in Upper Austria
        Linz
        1 December 1596
    Our peasants behave as if possessed by the devil. They collect in all four quarters and it is believed that the day before yesterday there were eighteen thousand of them in Kremsmünster. They did no violence, for food and drink were proffered to them at their first demand. Of this, however, they refused to partake. They seem bewitched, for as soon as the word is given, even in this cold, they leave their wives and children, hasten from their houses and farms, yet attacking neither towns, castles, nor even villages. They tell the populace, whom they drag along with them, that for all they care, horses, oxen and cows, even the women may perish, and they pawn their cattle with the inn-keepers and drink away their gold.
    To-morrow we expect a great number of them, in spite of the fact that the Proclamation which will be read to them has already arrived from Prague. I learn that by this Proclamation His Majesty grants them his pardon, though by their rebellion they have forfeited all their possessions, as well as their lives. Before next Tuesday His Serene Highness Archduke Mathias should come to Linz, for his retinue is already arriving hourly.

175. Presentation of the Order of the Garter to Henry IV
        Venice
        6 December 1596
    We are informed from Rouen of the ceremonies which took place when the King of France was at Vespers presented with the Order of the Garter in the archiepiscopal church near the royal palace. His Majesty was attired all in white in a most magnificent and exquisite manner, and wore a velvet hat with white feathers. He sat under a canopy on a chair on which lay a blue velvet cushion. On the left side of the chancel there was another canopy of gold cloth. Underneath it stood four chairs, and above these hung the coats of arms of England, Scotland, Denmark and of the States of Holland and Zeeland. A little lower down, on a red chair, sat the English Ambassador, near whom stood a herald in a garment of red and blue velvet, with the English coat of arms on his breast. The herald held a crimson-coloured cushion on which lay the Order of the Garter. When Vespers were over the King betook himself to the altar, where the Bishop of Auvergne sat robed in his pontifical vestments. On his right were two cardinals in red robes, to his left the Papal Nuncio and the Ambassadors of Scotland and Venice and the Duc de Joyeuse. Then the King stood up and was arrayed in a brown cassock and a low-necked velvet coat, trimmed with ermine. Thereupon the English Ambassador caused his instructions to be read out publicly by M. de Villeroy in a resounding voice and invested His Majesty with ring and chain, fastening round his right leg the Garter, beautifully embroidered with gold and pearls. Thereupon one hundred noblemen, many dukes, counts and other officers of the Crown who were decorated with the Order of the Holy Ghost, accompanied the King from the church with the trumpeter walking in front of them. The King’s shield and helmet were likewise carried before him.
    After His Majesty came the two cardinals and the English Ambassador. They accompanied the King to his palace. Thereupon six heralds clad in white proclaimed in all the squares: “Now there reigneth good and perfect peace between the almighty King Henry, Fourth of the Name, by the Grace of God King of France and Navarre and the almighty Elizabeth, Queen of England and Ireland. Both sovereigns bind themselves to the defence of their realms and thrones and promise each other everlasting protection and assistance. All those who would cause these Powers detriment or offence are threatened by them with war and destruction of their lands and subjects." Thereupon each went to his own home and in the palace where was held a princely banquet, there appeared many noblemen in masks and disguises.

176. Spanish Financial Policy
        Venice
        13 December 1596
    The King of Spain has sternly commanded that no gold or silver should be exported from the kingdom, or used for the purposes of trade. He has ascertained that this gold is recoined into the currency of foreign princes and that great profit is derived therefrom. It is also rumoured that a large sum of money for all sorts of merchandise has been dispatched to the Levant, where it has flown into the coffers of the Turkish Emperor. It seems that His Majesty is resolved to fit out a fleet out of the four or five millions of gold which are to be paid out yearly to the merchants as interest. Through this his bills of exchange will circulate slowly, causing much bankruptcy for money is very dear among the merchants.

177. Spanish Financial Policy
        Rome
        25 January 1597
    We hear through the last letters from Spain that the King has asked Portuguese merchants for a loan of four millions for Flanders. They were willing to gratify His majesty’s wishes but under the four following conditions:
    1. That His Majesty should pay the sums which he owes them.
    2. That they should also retain a third of their claim out of the above-mentioned loan.
    3. That they should be at liberty to trade in the Indies.
    4. That His Majesty should accept as payment various kinds of coins of the 
        Spanish realm. This, however, displeases His Majesty much, as he resents
        this demand as being extortinate.
            Venice, 31 January 1597
    This last letter from Spain corroborated the fact that after repeated examination of the merchants’ accounts, it will be proved that His Majesty owes them nothing, but that it is they who are debtors of His Majesty on account of the large sums which they have taken as interest during the last twenty years. This is to be recorded in print, that all may realize that His Majesty is not one to withhold the rightful property of others. In spite of this the Signori Ambrogio Spinola, Biccomelio and Malvenda daily plead at Court for reduction of payment, which might easily be granted, if they but paid the Cardinal of Austria two millions of gold at the end of march and the same amount with 6 per cent. in May. Letters from Genoa of the 15th day of December report that on account of the above-mentioned affair the Signori Francesco Marino and Francesco Serra have gone to Flanders to settle about a loan of three millions with that Court.

178. Birth of a Monstrosity at Vienna
        Vienna
        15 March 1597
    In the New Market here a poor lansquenet’s wife gave birth to a child who had a head on his back just like an Indian cock, and legs which were turned the wrong way at the knees so that it hit itself in the belly when it wished to bend them. It soon died, but not before being baptized.

179. Philip II Borrows Again 
        Rome
        29 March 1597
    It is written from Madrid on the 4th day of the month that the King has published a decree whereby no silver coins are to be exported from the realm. He has also ordered that the reals, which before were worth thirty maravedi, are henceforward to be changed for forty maravedi. The King has also signed with his own hand the deed of the loan of Herr Fugger, and confirmed it by a decree. But for the other merchants the situation is still unfavourable.

180. The Peasants’ War in Lower Austria
        Vienna
        15 April 1597
    The rebellious peasants have not as yet been pacified, and lie a few thousand strong near Melk. But many of them are being killed, hanged and made prisoners by the cavalry. Only yesterday more than twenty of them were brought into the Government House, amongst whom there were many ringleaders, also their commander, together with his lieutenant. The horsemen take everything the possess away from them, sending away daily whole shiploads of bed linen, bacon, dripping, all sorts of household goods and much money, and thus they collect great riches, as the peasants here are very wealthy. Last Good Friday there came here a ship laden with such like things, among which were two big casks of forty buckets each of wine, besides a chest and a few coffers filled with money. The journeymen seized them, tapped the casks and allowed all the wine to flow out. They broke open the chest and robbed it. The two small coffers, which no one could carry by himself, were taken away in a skiff by the fishermen, who shared their contents. On the following Wednesday such a ship again arrived and the people wished to treat it in the same manner. The horsemen who accompanied this vessel sent warning to the judge, who thereupon betook himself with his servants and other varlets to the river. They caught the thieves, dragged them off to prison and on the next day hanged four of them; although one of these had but taken a pailful of wine and the other two hens from the ship, one of which fell into the water. Of the fishermen who had stolen the small coffers with the money, twenty-five were caught. Of these some were let free, but they have to pay a fine of five thousand florins. What it is intended to do with the others time will show. If they are not punished people’s possessions will no longer be safe. Since the vintagers of Mödling, Petersdorf, Baden, Inzersdorf, Gumpoldskirchen and other places have refused to work any longer for their old wages, they have become rebellious. They collected about two thousand strong, and the nobility and all landowners were commanded to gather with their horses in as great numbers as was possible to them. Thus were raised about three hundred horses and a troop of infantry. So they broke up camp last Friday and marched on Mödling, Baden and Pfaffstätten. There they fell upon the rebellious vintagers before daybreak and immediately hanged a drummer and six ringleaders. When the rest saw that they were outnumbered they at once consented to parley and themselves delivered their ringleaders, of whom more than fifty were brought in by the horsemen, and, as a punishment, forced to work in the town moat.

181. A Religious Decree which was printed in Vienna and carried into the house of each burgess and communicated to him in the months of May and June 1597
        unknown
        1597
    The Mayor and Corporation of the city of Vienna by the gracious and earnest enactment of His Most Serene Highness, the Archduke Mathias of Austria, our most noble master, remind all burgesses, inhabitants and domestic servants, but first and foremost the drivers of vehicles in and outside the town, that they must altogether refrain from walking, riding, or driving on Sundays, holidays and other days to Enzersdorf, Vösendorf, Rodaum and other such like places to hear the sectarian, seductive preachers; also from being united there in matrimony, or having their children baptized by them, as many a time already this has been forbidden under threat of chastisement to body or loss of property, and confiscation of the carriage and the horse. This is to be intimated herewith and declared, in order that it should be complied with, as an ultimate warning, under penalty of severe and implacable punishment, so that none should excuse himself with ignorance thereof.

182. A Rain of Blood in Vienna
        Vienna
        18 July 1597
    At noon to-day, in a few places in front of the Schottentor, it rained blood. This was witnessed by many people, and many basketfuls of stones covered with blood were carried into the town.
        Vienna, undated
    An order to the mayor of this our town—Paulus Steyrer—to be delivered on the 19th day of July 1597.
    It is made known to the Mayor of this town, Paulus Steyrer, by the Government of Lower Austria, that, according to trustworthy reports, yesterday in front of the Schottentor in Siechenals, also at Hernals, Döbling, Sievering and near these places there fell a rain of blood. The stones which were sprinkled by it are said to be in existence. In order, however, to have a precise report thereon, the command goes forth from the Government that the Mayor should at once set an inquiry afoot as to the way in which this took place and that he should send information to the Government about the same before noon.
        Vienna, 19 July 1597
    The faithful report of Paulus Steyrer, Mayor of this town, in obedience to the above Decree. The enclosed Decree I have received with due reverence, and in order to obtain special information regarding this matter, I betook myself in my own person, accompanied by a burgess of the Outer Council, Georg Hesch by name, to certain villages, namely Hernals, Währing and Unter-Döbling. In Döbling I found out from the judge that a butcher in Nussdorf had last Friday bought on the oxen market three oxen. These he ordered his servant to drive home. As, however, one of the oxen was very lazy and hard to drive, the butcher’s man cut his tail with a knife and made him bleed. Thus the blood flowed into the hairs of the tail, and the ox splashed it about, whisking his tail this way and that, thus sprinkling the whole road. Wherever then the blood fell upon a stone there it remained. Thereupon I went with the above-named Hesch to Nussdorf, where I found both the ox and the butcher’s house; I have also, with my own eyes, seen the ox sprinkling the blood. Except for this no blood fell on any one’s body or clothing, and also no blood was found in the foliage of the trees or in the vineyards. So much have I to report obediently to Your Honour.
        Vienna, 22 July 1597
    It is still impossible to find the right explanation for the rain of blood. The Mayor reports of a wounded ox, others tell otherwise, among them Herr Streinz, keeper of the door of His Serene Highness, and a ducal halberdier. These report that the town is full of stones covered with blood, but that the drops of blood are as small as a raindrop or as large as lentils. As Herr Streinz has it, both may be right. We shall, however, investigate still further.

183. An Indian Rising in Peru
        Venice
        15 August 1597
    It is rumoured that five hundred Spaniards and fifteen thousand Indians have risen in Peru against Don Pedro de Valasco on account of religious dissensions. This is bad news not only for Spain but also for the merchants, as gold and silver arrives from Peru, conveyed hither by the fleet, and this will now be prevented by this rising.

184. Report on the disturbances between the Bohemians and the Walloons in the Neustadt near Prague
District of Neustadt
        8 September 1597
    Last Wednesday, the 3 this month, eight hundred Walloon horsemen arrived here. They are very brave men, but they did not wish to leave without money, therefore on the 5th they were given a month’s pay. Thereupon, on the next day they bestrode their horses and were bout to depart when, about 6 o’clock, there arose great discord between the Walloons and the Bohemian rabble here, on account of paltry and worthless reasons. At first it began with a few Walloons, because others had been back and forth in the town on their own business, and had been unable to return quickly to their quarters and their horses. The Bohemians, however, as though possessed, flocked together a few thousand strong, with firearms, iron tools, flails and other murderous weapons. Moreover, rendering the disturbance and the concourse of the common rabble still greater and more dangerous, the alarm was raised from the Mansion House and likewise in all other points of the town and the cry arose: “Kill the dogs!”  Thereupon they quickly overpowered the few Walloons, about fifty in number, who had collected in a hurry. Of these, who wished to return homeward and were innocent, twenty were shot, wounded and killed. Amongst the number were some eminent members of the nobility, some cornets and commandants and two pregnant women, one of whom bore boy twins. Also some innocent boys who were killed and thrown out of the window. But the insane Bohemians did not stop thereat, for not only did they strip the killed Walloons to their shirts—worse than any Turks would have done—but they hacked the naked corpses to such an extent that they were hardly to be recognized, and left them lying on the street. Moreover, they sole their horses, utensils and weapons, their clothes, and plundered all that was to be found in their quarters. Their Captain reported to the Castle that a hundred horses were missing, but of the Bohemians not more than two were killed. For whereas the Bohemians were shouting that all the German dogs should be killed, it is easily understood that a general riot must needs follow. On account of this His Imperial majesty sent for the captains at ten at night and ordered that this rebellion should be suppressed. The bodies of the dead were taken out of the houses and the streets. His Majesty and his following and, above all, the foreigners are deeply aggrieved. On the next day, the Walloons took themselves off. Those, however, who were robbed and the wounded are still here, and many corpses are believed to lie still hidden in secret places, cellars, ice-pits and such like. It is rumoured that fifty in all were done to death. May God guard us against such evil in future!

185. The Execution of the Rebellious Peasants in Vienna
        Vienna
        25 October 1597
    I can report nothing new except that yesterday the chief ringleaders of the rebellious peasants, the cooper and the tailor, together with two others, a provost and a commander, were executed in this town in the place called Hof, on a scaffold. The cooper was quartered alive, and the two others were beheaded. The tailor and these two died in pious, Christian and Catholic fashion, confessing their sins before death and partaking of Holy Communion. The cooper died unrepentant and in his Lutheran heresy. This is a fearsome example, and all rebels should take warning therefrom. Four more ringleaders have been made prisoners here. They will be taken to Waidhofen and one especially, Schremser by name, who was a colonel, will be quartered there, but the other three will be put to the sword.

186. Excommunication of Cesare d’Este.
        Rome
        27 December 1597
    In the Consistorium held here last Monday, in the presence of the Pope, the Bull of Excommunication against Don Cesare d’Este and his associates was read out in a clear voice by Cardinal Peretti, as Deacon, before the full assembly of the Holy College. After that the Pope fell on his knees, kissed the candle which he held between his hands and thereupon spoke the anathema against Don Cesare and his followers. Then he returned to his customary place.
    His Holiness wishes likewise to include in this excommunication all those who hinder the proclamation of the Bull and such as did not permit the transit of provisions for the papal troops. At the same time there goeth forth a decree, addressed to the Imperial and Royal Majesty, as well as to all the Christian princes, that no help whatsoever is to be vouchsafed to Don Cesare and his vassals. Whoever opposes this command also comes under the Bull of Excommunication, and preachers exhort the people to guard themselves against it. Twelve days’ grace has, however, been granted to Don Cesare.

187. The Expulsion of the Hanseatic Merchants from England
        Cologne
        12 February 1598
            background: Letters from Amsterdam confirm the expulsion of the German merchants from England. This will come as a blow to many and in especial to the hanseatic merchants who have had their business and their own houses in London.
THE ROYAL DECREE OF EXPULSION
    We, Elizabeth, by the Grace of God, Queen of England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, send Our greetings to Our dearly loved and faithful Mayors and Justices of Our City of London. Under the title of a mandate, the Roman Emperor has lodged a complaint with all Electors, Bishops, Counts, the Diets and all citizens regarding different injuries, which it is supposed have been inflicted in Our Realm upon the United Hanseatic Towns. The Roman Emperor complains of prejudice caused to the Hanseatic towns by Our merchants, known as the Merchant Adventurers. His grievance is obviously a great injustice and opposed to all that is right and fitting. Nevertheless, not only is it forbidden to all our merchants to trade in the Roman Empire, but it is also commanded under threat of fines and punishment that they eschew that Empire and trade, neither openly nor secretly, in any towns or harbours therein. They are threatened with imprisonment and confiscation of goods, and various other sentences of extreme rigour are pronounced against Our subjects. We have already dispatched a letter to the Roman Emperor, as well as to the Electors and other Princes, in order that they should learn Our answer to the attacks of the Hanseatic towns. We have asked in the epistle that this order should not be cancelled, but merely postponed. Inasmuch as we are doubtful whether this will be granted, we have, in the meantime, found it proper to command all citizens of the Hanseatic Towns and the Roman Empire to cease trading. This particularly concerns those who inhabit the “Stalhof,” and Our City of London. We have threatened them in like manner with the same punishments as contained in the Imperial Decree. In order to carry out this Our decree, We command you, the Mayors and Justices of our above-named City of London, to betake yourselves at once to the house which is called Stalhof.
    Order the chiefs residing in that house into your presence, and announce to them this Our decree. You will command them to leave Our kingdom on the 28 g this month on the same day as Our merchants have to leave the Roman Empire. You are further ordered to inform all citizens of the Hanseatic towns of the Roman Empire wheresoever they may be, that they must leave the country on the same day. You will arrange the attendance of their Mayor and their Justice and that of two officers from our Licensing House, in order to take possession of the Stalhof on the 28th day of January. This will be in force till we learn whether there is no way and means to approach the Roman Emperor, and obtain for Our subjects permission to right of trade in the Roman Empire. In corroboration of Our will, we have published this Our letter in Our High Council of Whitehall on the 13th day of January in the fortieth year of Our reign.
    Ad Notam: From this order are excluded those Hanseatic towns situated in the Kingdom of Poland, which have had nothing to do with the above-mentioned Imperial indictment.

188. A Present for the Mistress of Henry IV
        Venice
        8 May 1598
    The Duchess of Mercurio has presented Madame Gabrielle d’Estrées, the favourite of the King of France, with beauteous pleasure grounds and a park with animals in Brittany, worth more than sixty thousand crowns.

189. The Death of Philip II
        Madrid
        13 September 1598
    After our King had lain ill for some time, he died here in the monastery of the Escurial on the 12th of the month at 5 o’clock in the morning. May God have mercy on His Majesty. Immediately thereafter a courier was dispatched to the Imperial Court. His Majesty had been three weeks in his bed and could not be moved on account of large ulcers which had broken out. He was also forced to lie prone always.

190. A Tender-Hearted Son
        Rome
        5 October 1598
    In letters from Messina dated the 24th day of September we have it that Ciccala has sent a Christian slave with a letter to the Viceroy. In this he says that four years running he has gone into that sea with his Armada, because he feels a great desire to see his mother and take counsel with her. Permission to do this he was never able to obtain from the former Viceroy, wherefore he has done damage to the town of Reggio and other places in Calabria. If the Viceroy would but send his mother to him, he, in return, would refrain from attacking any ships, whether in this, or any other Spanish sea. He would also send back his mother in safety. Thereupon the Viceroy made answer in Spanish that he could not grant his request unless he, that is Ciccala, would send his son with several Turks as hostages. These the latter dispatched at once with two galleys to Messina. Then the Viceroy sent the mother and the brothers with several friends and accompanied by some well-known noblemen, on the galley to Ciccala, who showed great honour to all. After he had remained for four hours with his mother, and had presented her, as well as the people previously mentioned, with golden pieces and other gifts, he allowed them to depart in peace to Messina. He also sent the Viceroy several presents and conveyed to him a message that on the very next day he should set sail for Tripoli in order to quell the disturbances there.

191. The Will of Philip II
        Venice
        8 October 1598
    Letters from Spain confirm the death of the King in the seventy-first year of his life and the forty-first year of his reign. Before he died he is said to have ordered all his gentlemen to depart from him, that he might be alone with his son, the Prince. He rests in a coffin encased in lead. He has exhorted his son, after he should have succeeded his ancestor Charles V, of most blessed memory, and His Majesty, to grant due obedience to the Pope and the Apostolic See in all his kingdoms, to love peace above all things, and to lay hands on nothing but that which was his by rights. Also that he should practise justice in all his territories and keep perpetual peace with the King of France and other Christian princes, and particularly with the Republic of Venice. He also gave him a sealed letter, which His Majesty has written with his own hand and has ordered him not to open before His Majesty should have given up the ghost.

192. The Attempted Murder of Maurice of Nassau
        Antwerp
        15 October 1598
    It is confirmed that an attempt has been made to stab Maurice of Nassau with a long weapon which looked like a pointed dagger, the interior of which was full of holes and poison. The assassin, however, betrayed himself and confessed in prison that some years before he had been persuaded to do this by the Jesuits, who had sworn to pay him a large sum of money. They had already paid him in advance one hundred Flemish pounds, and the remainder he was to receive after he had committed the deed. Whether this will further the peace negotiations, time will show.

193. The War in Sweden
        Danzig
        18 October 1598
    I enclose the news which we have received from Sweden from His Royal Majesty of Poland. Duke Charles had petitioned through the Electors and the Ducal Ambassadors to be allowed to appear in person before His Majesty in order to justify his mode of government and to refute the calumnies of his adversaries; but safe conduct was not granted unto him. It was required that he should surrender at discretion, disband all his troops and await submissively the verdict of the King. This the Duke was unable to accept; he thanked the Ambassadors for their trouble and resorted to other means. On the 17th September he advanced with all his troops, twelve thousand infantry and one thousand five hundred cavalry, to within one and half a mile of the King’s camp and there pitched his own. He himself appeared about quarter of a mile from the King’s camp with six hundred men and sent a herald to the King with the request that he should be allowed to parley with four of the latter’s Counsellors. These the King sent to him and to them the Duke expounded his fruitless efforts to obtain a personal interview with the King, in which he could have justified himself. He begged the four gentlemen for their mediation. Though they answered him in a churlish manner, yet they carried his petition to the King, who, however, rejected it and once more reaffirmed the above-named grievous conditions. In the meantime a skirmish had arisen between the six hundred Swedes of Charles and the four hundred Hungarians, in which the Swedes were defeated. Through the personal intervention of the King and the Duke the fight was suspended. Thereupon the Duke again inquired for the conditions in order to settle the whole dispute. He was informed that he must make his submission, disband his troops, retreat and appear before the appointed Diet at Stockholm. In view of his danger the Duke accepted these conditions as he wished to display his goodwill and avoid further bloodshed; he also withdrew, but only in order to occupy a more favourable position before the Castle of Stangeborg, which he was able to bombard as well as the King’s camp. When the King’s army became aware of this the next morning, it lost heart. Thereupon Duke Charles rejected the old conditions and put forward new ones which were hardly more acceptable. New negotiations were begun, which the Duke prolonged on purpose because he was expecting his Armada from Finland, where it had scattered the royal troops. He also learned that the King’s fleet had been driven from its course to Stockholm by storm, and that it has lost part of its crew. He determined to strike at the King by land and by sea, as soon as his fleet had arrived. The King, however, retreated secretly by night, no one knows where, forsaking all his provisions. When the crews of the Royal Fleet, which was lying off Stockholm, went ashore the following morning, in order to receive their pay, they found the camp empty. As now, however, the news of the approach of Charles’s Armada began to spread, and as they had orders to take aboard the large stores of provisions and ammunition, they quickly weighed anchor. But only twenty-five of the sixty ships arrived in safety to the port of Danzig. Two were sent to the bottom, the flagship together with two others, which were overladen, ran ashore and their precious cargo was plundered by Charles’s ships. The others, about thirty in number, mostly Scotch and English, did not put up any sort of defence and remained quietly at anchor. Duke Charles sent them a message that it was known to him that they had but agreed to convoy the troops under compulsion, and that no harm would befall them or the goods aboard, did they but willingly surrender. This they did. Thus Duke Charles obtained considerable booty and a great victory. Nothing is known about the King’s fate. The King’s mistake is that he did not defeat the Duke and take him prisoner as some of his Counsellors had advised.

194. Philip’s Lack of Money
        Madrid
        20 November 1598
    The new King of Spain, with his cavaliers, on the 8th of this month held his entry in most magnificent fashion into San Hieronymo, not far from here, under a canopy which was carried by twenty men, and on this occasion there was a display of much gold and silver and precious stones. Now the King is preparing to sally forth to Barcelona with his sister and his mother. This is due to take place next December. But there is great penury. And whereas the fleet is expected in January with gold and silver, His Majesty had countenanced negotiation with the purveyors of the Court for a sum of four hundred thousand ducats to be paid out at different dates in the Netherlands.
    On the 7th day of November on account of the plague, which is spreading more and more, several streets in Lisbon have been barricaded and in the Palace all gates have been closed excepting one. Also in front of this palace a whole street has been walled up and so has a house in which there were many different articles of value; the people who lived in it were also driven out. But some daring youngsters assembled and carried everything away at night time. In Galicia as well death holds sway.

195. August Visitors to the House of Fugger in Augsburg
        Augsburg
        25 February 1599
    Last Saturday evening His Serene Highness the Arch-Duke Maximilian, together with the reigning Prince of Bavaria and about three hundred members of his retinue and a stately following of noble dames, arrived here and took a lodging in the house of Herr Marx Fugger. On the following Sunday and Monday there was held in the presence of His Serene Highness and his spouse, a most magnificent and splendid tourney and tilting at the ring, by the Herren Antonius and Christoph Fugger as Mantenatores and the other gentlemen as Aventuriers in exquistie ornaments and raiment. Curious processions were also witnessed. In particular a Bavarian peasant wedding at which the peasants were entertained with food and drink in the open wine market. Thereupon these peasants danced and sang, and feinted and skirmished with their daggers, all this, which was most pleasant to behold, contributing to the entertainment of His Serene Highness. On the Tuesday following the Magistrate of the town gave a sumptuous banquet in the Town Hall to His Serene Highness and to His Spouse and to other men and women of high rank; moreover, a wondrously beautiful ball, in the dancing hall above the wine market, which was ornamented most pleasingly with branches of fir and a black velvet dais and beautiful hangings. When the dance came to an end at seven at night, two little sham castles and a mighty firework were set alight with innumberable explosions and highflying rockets. Thanks be to the Lord that all passed safely and well. May God grant that this may lead to content on both sides and good neighbourly relations.

196. The Edict of Nantes
        Lyons
        21 March 1599
    Fresh letters from Paris of the 15th of this month report that the Edict about religious peace was published in Parliament on the morning of the 25th of February. On the same afternoon the King’s sister started on her journey to Lorraine, but on the way stopped to visit His Majesty at Saint-Germain. The Edict has, however, not yet been published in the city, as it appears that once more something has happened to prevent this.

197. The Baptism of Jews in Rome
        Rome
        15 May 1599
    Early last Sunday the Pope celebrated Mass in the Chapel of San Giorgio. There were there seven Jewish persons, three men and four women dressed all in red. These the Pope baptized himself in the presence of nineteen Cardinals, seven of whom he appointed as godfathers. He named the men after these and gave the women other names, and then caused them to be confirmed and immediately to receive Communion.

198. A Plague of Dolphins in the Mediterranean
        Rome
        10 July 1599
    Twp canons have just arrived here from Marseilles in order to recount to the Pope that in the Sea of Provence there is to be observed such a conglomeration of dolphins that not only do they interfere with the fishing, a most valuable source of revenue, but also with ships sailing on the sea. A Papal Brief has been bestowed upon the canons addressed to their Bishop, in which it is ordered that the matter should be taken in hand by means of prayers in the churches, processions and much fasting. Moreover, the Pope anathematizes this vermin, so that, with God’s help, it may perish.

199. The Leasing of the Spanish Post
        Rome
        26 July 1599
    Don Antonio Taxis, the chief Postmaster in Spain, has determined to lease the administration of his post to Lorenzo Goveto, a Genoese, for nine thousand crowns yearly, by which, so he asserts, he will make three thousand crowns each year.

200. A Big Bankruptcy in Venice
        Venice
        22 July 1599
    On Tuesday the local merchant Signor Finalosa declared himself bankrupt to the extent of four hundred thousand crowns. He has given his assets to his creditors, however, as six hundred thousand crowns. If a respite of six months be granted to him, wherein to pay, he will discharge his debts to every one to the last farthing. But there has come to light a debt of thirty thousand crowns over and above the amount mentioned heretofore.

201. Holland becomes a Colonial Power
        Amsterdam
        24 July 1599
    Out of the eight Dutch ships which left fourteen and a half months ago for India to obtain spices, four arrived here this week. They are richly laden. Their most important consignment is nearly three hundred loads of pepper, which should come to over four thousand packets. The remaining cargo consists of other kinds of spices, such as cloves, nutmeg, cinnamon, etc. The ships have a capacity of two hundred and twenty-five, two hundred and fifteen, seventy and forty loads respectively. The other four ships with soldiery have been left at Banca. These have set sail for the Moluccas and are to follow in a few months. This is considered here as great tidings, and much wonder is expressed that they should have taken such a short time over the journey. It took them seven months to make the East Indies and they lay two months in Banca. There they procured all their cargo, and have returned in five and a half months. Never have the Portuguese accomplished such a journey.
    The Indians of Banca traded with them in most friendly spirit, and the Dutch paid the inhabitants of Banca, but with the help of the Dutch, the Indians have killed eight hundred of these and captured the rest with the ships. Whereas the Dutch have succeeded so greatly in this sea journey they will undertake others, and if the King of Spain does not beware and put a stop to them, in time great harm will befall the kingdom of Portugal and the Venetians.
    These ships are valued at three hundred thousand Flemish pounds. They will make yearly a great trade in spices and cause many others to alter their course. The Dutch States wish to go out again to India with these ships and to send an envoy to the King of Banca. They will never relinquish this desire unless the King of Spain prevent them by force.

202. Divorce Plans of Henry IV
        Rome
        12 September 1599
    To-day, on account of the request of the King of France for a divorce, a meeting of Cardinals was held, in which the following three considerations were put forward:
    1. That the King and Queen of France were blood relations and that they had no
        dispensation.
    2. That King Charles IX had, out of fright, almost by violence, compelled them
        to marry.
    3. That at the time they were of different religion.
    Therefore this divorce is to proceed with all celerity. From this it is gathered that the marriage of His Majesty with the Princess of Tuscany will surely take place.
203. Family Tragedies in Rome
        Rome, 12 September 1599
    Cenci’s children were executed here yesterday. The eldest son was rent asunder with two tongs, beheaded and quartered, the daughter was beheaded. The youngest son was forced to watch all this. He was brought from prison and straightway taken back to it. He was pardoned on account of his youth. A nobleman of Rome, Paulus de Santa Croce, stabbed his own mother who was fifty-four years old, because he surprised her in adultery. The murderer, however, escaped through the window. A law-suit has already begun against him and property of his will be confiscated to the amount of seventy thousand crowns.

204. The Dutch Harass Portuguese Trade
        Antwerp
        22 October 1599
    Letters from Amsterdam report that a Dutch ship, which had sailed with thirty-six other ships from the Canaries to India, had separated from these and joined two English pirates in robbing a few ships in the Spanish Main. This ship made fast in Texel, which is not far from Amsterdam, but it is not known as yet what goods it has brought. Two Dutch ships have likewise called at Emden with fifteen hundred cases of sugar. Three other ships are expected from Brazil. Dutch navigation to the Indies is becoming ever greater, which will cause the Portuguese heavy damage in their trade.

205. A Miracle in Rome
        Rome
        23 October 1599
    In a Church Cecilia in Trastevere there has been discovered the corpse of the Saint and Holy Martyr Cecilia, perfectly preserved, a linen cloth over her face and dressed in such guise as she went to her martyrdom eight hundred years ago.

206. The Counter Reformation in Austria
        Steyr
        30 October 1599
    As already announced, His Serene Highness Ferdinand of Austria and Lord of the Manor of the three countries of Styria, Carinthia and Carniola, holding a hunt soon after St. Jacob’s Day at Eisenerz, forthwith displaced two pastors and appointed in their stead two Catholic priests. When, however, His Serene Highness had left for Graz, the two above-named priests were again driven out of the parish. His Serene Highness was very much displeased and immediately dispatched some commissaries to reinstate the two priests. He also gave them six hundred troopers from Croatia and Slavonia, in order that, should the inhabitants of Eisenerz prove obstinate, they might enforce his will with an iron fist. These arrived here fourteen days ago and the community and the miners wanted to oppose them in arms. Thereupon the commissaries promised them that no harm should be fall them from the soldiers, and that the desires of the inhabitants of Eisenerz should be respected.
    The Commissaries were then allowed to enter the town, and they won the game, for immediately thereupon they arrested the heads of the municipality, the aldermen, burgesses and others. Also every one had to deliver his arms in the market-place and the soldiers were quartered in the town. Thereafter the two priests were reinstated by force and seven gibbets were erected in the marketplace, of which two were just in front of the Town Hall.
    On the next day the provost with his retinue also betook himself there, so that he could begin with hangings, beheadings, impalings and other torments, tortures and agonies, to find out by means of suffering whether there was an understanding between them and other places and districts. Altogether it is a grievous state of affairs. Every one who can, flies from the parish. Women with their children are driven from their houses and are obliged to watch in terror and pain the miserable existence of their husbands. Although it was intended to execute the ring-leaders and the heads of the town at once, it is said that Imperial Commissaries have arrived these last days, who have sternly forbidden, in the name of His Majesty, any harm to be done unto any man or to put any one to the rack or torture. It is greatly hoped that His Majesty will show mercy.
    The Commissaries are also due to travel these days to Aussee, Schladming, Gröbming, Neuhaus and Rottenmann, in order to proceed with this matter everywhere. That this should take place with more speed, the governor, Count Wolkenstein, has collected three hundred of his own peasantry in the field one mile from here so as to unite with the other troops. As, however, most of them belong to the Evangelical faith, they are not reliable. When the need for action comes, they will not yield obedience. Three weeks ago His Highness had the collegiate church in Graz forced and caused the chairs, the altars, the company flags and the gravestones of former sovereigns to be pulled out and hacked to pieces and the whole church emptied. For what purpose he now wishes to use it is uncertain.
    The secretary of the local council of Graz, Herr Gabelhofer, is still imprisoned in the castle in that place. None of his acquaintances are allowed to see him. The secretary of the Carinthian Council, Herr Kantelberger, has died of torture, after great agony. The motive of this was to find out the intentions of the local council; but he would divulge nothing.

207. Death Sentence on the Earl of Essex
        Antwerp
        31 December 1599
    There is no news yet from England as to how matters stand regarding the peace with Spain. Otherwise there is information that Lord Essex stands in great peril of his life, as sentence has already been passed upon him. As, however, some noblemen have interceded for him, it has been postponed. But the Queen still holds him in strong custody.

208. The Year of the Jubilee in Rome
        Rome
        1 January 1600
    Although the Pope was not quite free from gout, he was yet unwilling to put off the opening of the Holy Gate any longer on account of the large sums which the Hospital of the Holy Trinity was spending on the great mass of Pilgrims who have crowded the town. Therefore, on the last day of December, he had himself carried in pontifical vestments to the Church of St. Peter, accompanied by all his cardinals, bishops, the foreign ambassadors, his clergy and retinue. There, after he had reached the other door with great difficulty, and after the Antiphones had been sung, he opened the Holy Gate with the usual ceremonies. Although the Swiss Guards had beaten back the crowds with their staves, the journey of the Pope was very tedious. Whereupon the cardinals also opened the gates of the Churches of St. Paul, St. John and Our Blessed Lady under a great concourse of the people.

209. Decree Forbidding the Export of Coins From Rome
        Rome
        29 January 1600
    The Pope’s chamberlain, a cardinal, has had all the local and foreign silver coins valued anew and has made a decree that no one in future should take away from here more than five crowns.

210. The Monastic Life of Pope Clement VIII
        Rome
        12 February 1600
    The Pope is quite determined to lead a monastic life as an example to the whole world. On account of this he has already ordered all carpets and ornaments to be removed from his rooms and especially from his sleeping chamber, allowing nothing to remain therein except a bedstead, a table and several skulls, as he wishes only to lie between four walls. Near him sleep two Benedictine monks, who stand in very good repute. He has summoned them to his presence, in order to pass his time with them and only to think of spiritual matters.

211. Clement VIII hears Confessions
        Rome
        8 April 1600
    Last Saturday the pope sat in the chair of the Chief Penitentiary in the Church of St. Peter with a white rod in his hand, and heard confessions there for three hours, granting the people absolution. Among these were many pilgrims, such as the Viceroy of Naples and the Duke of Sessa, as well as the bandit chief and the former most intimate adviser of the Sciarra. These the Pope touched on the forehead with the white rod.
    On Tuesday the above-named Viceroy and his wife, also the Princess of Castelvetrano, dined with the Pope, and the day before yesterday Cardinal Aldobrandino gave the Viceroy a sumptuous banquet served at five tables. After dinner a hunt of all kinds of deer was held in the courtyard of the palace.

212. The Remarriage of Henry IV
        Rome
        6 May 1600
    It is learned that the Grand Duke of Florence has given a royal banquet in honour of the French Ambassador and of the new Queen of France, at which the Queen sat, under a canopy to which there were two steps, at the head of the table, and that M. de Selleri sat next to her. The Grand Duke and the Grand Duchess waited upon them at the table with many other noblemen and noblewomen, and the Bracciano-Orsini and two Princes of Medici. The above-named Grand Duke has given a beautifully trained horse as a present to M. de Lincourt and the latter has immediately left for France.
    The Queen is so beautifully and well-proportioned a woman and is adorned as well with so many virtues and the fear of God that it is hoped that much happiness may accrue out of this marriage for the throne of France. As the Cardinal Aldobrandino will travel with the new Queen to Marseilles and after that to Avignon, in order to show all honour in the name of the Pope to the King and has affianced wife, the galleys of the Pope have already been set in readiness, and provisioned with biscuits at Naples.

213. Wholesale Murder in Savoy
        Rome
        6 May 1600
    The afore-mentioned rascally persons, who caused many deaths in Piedmont and especially in Fassano, where the young Princes of Savoy are living, and who in many places have rubbed poisonous ointment, were yesterday executed in most woeful fashion. Next week more of these people are to be judged, amongst them a barber who prepared the ointment, and has confessed that he murdered therewith more than two thousand people, as though this poison it was possible to spread the plague.

214. England and Holland Conquer the Trade of the World
        Antwerp
        2 July 1600
    From Holland and Zeeland we get written tidings that four ships from the East Indies and others from the West Indies have again sailed into Plymouth in England heavily laden with spices. Altogether they have brought ninety loads of pepper, which are estimated at about 324,000 lb.; also cloves and mace. Besides these there are nine other ships expected in Zeeland, Amsterdam and Rotterdam. The consignment of the two ships which have recently come from the Moluccas amounts to 620,000 lb. of nutmeg, 65,000 lb. of mace, 35,000 lb. of cloves and 700 lb. of pepper, which altogether is estimated at 230,000 Flemish pounds. In exchange these two ships have carried away with them 300,000 Flemish pounds in cash. It is said that six more ships are due to sail for the East Indies, namely four of the old and two of the new Company. This route becomes therefore of universal use, which is very harmful to the Spaniards, because it has been decided in Holland and Zeeland that this journey should be made through Portuguese and Spanish waters. It is announced from Emden that a ship has come here from Pernambuco in Brazil, the sailors of which report that the fleet of the United Provinces with seven ships have captured two forts in Brazil, and that afterwards they attacked the town and carried off between seven and eight thousand cases of sugar.

215. Conferences of Philip III of Spain for Purposes of obtaining Credit
        Rome
        17 June 1600
    The gentlemen we named recently who a short time ago were resolved upon arranging a new financial transaction with the King of Spain, are now, for lack of ready money, no longer wishful to lend him these sums. For this reason they have begged the gentlemen of the Monte San Giorgio to pay the deficit required to complete the needed amount, in return for which they have offered to place in the Monte as much fine gold and silver as would be necessary as a security. This, however, was refused, and therefore His Majesty suffers from some lack of cash. Although the Spanish kingdom had declared itself prepared to advance six more millions as Assignation on the fleet which is due to arrive, and to pay the royal debt therewith, this money has not been found to be sufficient. The merchants, who are concerned in this, have offered to withhold their loan in the meantime, in order that the intended Assignation may be extended until the arrival of the fleet.

216. The Dangers of Sea Voyages
        Cologne
        18 August 1600
    Two ships the Lion and the Lioness belonging to Balthasar Monseron in Zeeland have arrived home from Madagascar with thirty loads of pepper and with some white ginger. They have had a bad voyage and have endured great dangers both afloat and on land on account of the savages. These gave them to drink of an intoxicating beverage, which they took full of trust. Owing to this they all became unconscious and for three whole hours the ship was besieged by the savages and nearly lost. But those on board the Lioness fought the savages so bravely that the latter had to abandon her. However, eighty men who had landed perished. These savages, therefore, should not be trusted.

217. A Persian Embassy in Prague
        Prague
        12 October 1600
    About 4 o’clock in the afternoon yesterday, the Persian Embassy, about thirty strong, arrived here. They were met as far as the Royal pavilion on the Stern by close on three hundred well-equipped horsemen and two captains of the town, namely Herr Popel and the chief steward and Lord Chancellor Herr von Schönberg with the Imperial dapifers and servants of the Court, and over and above thirty coaches, each drawn by six horses. These accompanied them as far as their quarters, “The Wild Man Inn,” on the Klein-Seite. Four hundred armed men were likewise placed in front of the quarters of the Ambassador, who therefore has been met and received in very fine fashion. The Embassy has now been on its journey for about one year and a half during which time sixteen of its members have died. They went across India and by sea round the whole of Africa. They intend to conclude an alliance with His Imperial Majesty against the Turks; this is to be taken as the sign of special Divine dispensation likewise, as nations so far distant come to us in Germany, an omen of great changes in the future. The head of the Embassy is an Englishman and he is short and dressed in English fashion. The most important next to him is an elderly grey-haired man, a princely official of the King of Persia, attired in Turkish dress, as are likewise his servants. Whereas so many of the Ambassador’s Persian servants died during the journey, he has taken into his service Englishmen and Frenchmen. The Embassy was greatly amazed at the great concourse of people who had come together from the three towns of Prague.

218. The Capture of the Fortress of Kanizsa by the Turks
        Vienna
        10 November 1600
    It is all over with Kanizsa. The enemy, unfortunately, has it in his hands and has allowed our troops to withdraw. Colonel Paradeiser is expected here every day to render accounts for this event. It is reported from different sides that the Turk is making strong incursions along the frontiers and that this coming winter he will give us much trouble, and perhaps even seek a sight in our territory.
            Vienna, 15  November 1600
    On the 14  this month the former Commander of Kanizsa arrived here for the inquiry fixed for the 1st day of December and is staying with Herr Ferdinand Kolonitz. The servants, however, lodged at the inn, “The Golden Ostrich." The Commander was immediately informed by His Highness the Archduke Mathias that he should not only prepare in writing his defence of the surrender of Kanizsa but also report on the course of the siege from day to day. Time will show how this will be.

219. The Death of the Cardinal of Austria
        Rome
        18 November 1600
    The Cardinal of Austria died last Sunday morning. The body was opened and it was found that the lungs and the liver were defective. The corpse was accompanied by all the members of the Order and the Pope’s own servants to Santa Maria di Anima, where it will remain until a message is received from the Margrave of Burgau as to whether he will have the body brought to his Bishopric of Constanz. The Cardinal was wont to receive thirty thousand thalers from his Bishopric, thirteen thousand from the Bishopric of Brixen and eighteen thousand from the canonicates in Suabia. In Spain he received yearly ten thousand kronen from the Bishopric in Toledo; he also held the ecclesiastical sinecures in Germany, which His Imperial Majesty would very much like to transfer to one of the members of the House of Austria. It is believed, however, that the chapter will be given a free choice.

220. Yet Another False Don Sebastian
        Venice
        22 December 1600
    Last Friday the Privy Council ordered that the man who has lain imprisoned here for so long, and who makes himself out to be King Sebastian of Portugal, should leave Venice at daybreak and the territory of this State within three days. If, however, he should not do this and be again caught, he would be put in irons for ten years in the galleys and, if he be not fit for this, be kept in strict durance for the rest of his life.

221. A Letter from Peru
        Lima
        27 May 1600
            background: Copy of an epistle which Father Bartholomeus Descouart dispatched to Father Egidius Bauerius from Lima, which is the capital of the Province of Peru.
    Reverend Father,
    I write to your Reverence through Father Emanuel Vasquez, and in order to avoid circumstantiality, I enclose herewith the copy of a letter which the Fathers of the College in the small town of Arequipa have addressed to the Father Visitor Stephen Paex, which runs thus: “It is only meet that there be recounted unto you the strangest happenings which have ever taken place in the world, those which we experienced but lately with great fear and are partly still enduring in the town of Arequipa; they are as follows:
    “On the first Friday of Lent, which fell on the 18th day of February of this year 1600, on the evening of the said day, after several slight earthquakes had occurred on the four preceding days, the shocks began to assume such frequency that not even a quarter of an hour would elapse without an earthquake taking place. Up to one hour after midnight all the people had to stay outside their houses, at which time still stronger and more violent shocks caused these to sway. Whereas an improvement was confidently expected after dawn, the calamity took such proportions that Holy Mass could not be celebrated. As, however, the concourse of people to our church was so great, we prepared to celebrate Mass. But hardly had this ceremony begun at 8 o’clock, when the earthquakes became so violent that the people incontinently fled from the church and, at the sight of such obvious danger, we regretted that we had begun Mass. This anxiety and misery therefore waxed the greater the longer they lasted, and this went on till 6 o’clock at night, in such fashion that within twenty-four hours there were two hundred such strong and terrific shocks that all the buildings collapsed thereupon with the exception of the smaller ones. Because of the continuous disturbances and vibrations people have betaken themselves to a safe spot outside their houses.
    “On the same day at half-past 5 in the evening, the sky became covered with dark clouds, heavy thunder was heard, and there arose suddenly an unusually strong squall, after which we looked for a cloudburst and torrential rain. This did not occur, but instead there dropped from the clouds a mass of thick white sand. With violence and turbulence this went on and slackened not for two hours of the night, and in this time there roared such heavy thunder that we resigned ourselves to the expectation of the end of the world. Lastly, we heard such pitifully howling voices in the air that one believed that many legions of evil spirits were travelling about in the sky; and it was impossible to recognize either from the uproar or any other circumstance whether this was a natural occurrence, or rather the cursing and the raving of demons. Now, because this howling continued and the rain of sand was ever increasing, nor did it stop for the whole of the night, although the roar and rush had become somewhat quieter about 2 o’clock, the people filled all the squares with plaintive and resounding clamour, so that one might have thought that the Day of Judgment had come. The populace did not trouble itself about anything except confession and the bemoaning of their sins, self-castigations and beating of their breasts, and thus collected within the churches from which they led processions with unusual devoutness.
    “On the first Sunday in Lent the whole of the town and the surrounding country were covered in white as if snow had fallen thereon. The ground throughout was covered about half a yard high with thick sand, which had to be thrown down from the roofs in order that they should not collapse, and our new building or hall which had been erected shortly before, was demolished thereby. At midday the darkness thickened once more, and at 2 o’clock of the afternoon the night and fog became so opaque that we could not see one another. Whereas the Father Rector was preaching at this time to the people, we had to lighten up by means of burning torches. At half-past 4 thinner sand began to fall and the heavens became clearer and the atmosphere a little lighter.
    “On the following Monday the sky was somewhat darkish and overcast, whereat the people took fright and burnt lights for meals at noon.
    “On Tuesday from 9 o’clock in the morning until 3 o’clock in the afternoon it rained ashes, so that hair and beard became clogged, or stiffened completely. This caused great damage to the weaker trees and the crops so that their entire destruction was feared. On Wednesday and Thursday it became a little quieter, although the trembling of the earth and the rain of sand and the darkness of the air had not entirely disappeared. On Friday there was hardly seen any daylight at all, but much fog and lightning, and thunder was heard by day and night.
    “The Saturday also dawned rather dark and, besides this, there was a continual quaking of the earth. The sand, moreover, fell so thick and fast that it seemed as if it had been thrown down in buckets from the heavens above. It became necessary to sweep it, by the light of burning torches, from the roofs, which were beginning to give. Altogether it might have been taken to be the Last Judgment, and there was such dread, mourning and howling among the people and in the air that it was indeed a wretched sight, and everything looked like inevitable death and extinction. In spite of all the foregoing, the population, both secular and ecclesiastical, were not to be prevented by the rain of sand from performing their processions and their supplications, bareheaded and barefooted. This same day, there was such a terrific earthquake that we expected total extermination and every one spent the night in the churches.
    “On the following Sunday it turned lighter, so that we could see each other. But the shocks continued and the rain of sand did not stop, although it became somewhat less heavy. At 10 o’clock there occurred another mighty earthquake with a terrific upheaval of the earth. On Monday it was again much clearer and there was more light. There came, however, another heavy earthquake. But at 3 o’clock in the afternoon it became pitch dark and the lightning and the thunder became so awesome that we fain expected the end of the world. A wind that arose from inland drove the thunderstorm with the darkness out to sea, and gave us back daylight. On the Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday it became quieter and more peaceful, the earthquakes were likewise less violent and the day lighter; but it remained so overcast that one could see neither the sun nor the moon. On the Thursday at eventide there fell a thick, cloudy darkness, which was followed by a tedious rain of sand which lasts to this very hour of writing, that is to say, up to midday of the following Friday, when it has become somewhat more clear.
    “Through this sad and painful existence, the people have covered themselves in ashes and have also castigated themselves. They have wandered about helpless and at random, undertaking all kinds of practices, such as Confession, Communion, other penitential exercises and processions with the Cross. Lamentations and sermons were heard night and day, and there was no one who did not show great sorrow and remorse, however nefarious and godless his life. The sand and dust, which had fallen, stretched around us for forty-eight miles along the roads, and it is to be feared that most of the herds have been damaged or have possibly perished through it. We are, however, consoled in this that the sand has not dried up the fruits of the field, although it has laid low a great many, and nearly all the fruits on the trees. The cause of this plague is supposed to be the volcano near Omate, which place or mountain lies eighteen miles hence. This mountain has opened up and vomited forth stones and fire through which five or six villages, which lie round it, were destroyed and laid waste. It is given out as a fact that for twenty days running there was a continuous thick and dark night. In the village of Omate there fell one after the other stones weighing five and seven pounds each, through which sixty persons were killed. The houses are all buried in sand, which lies to a far greater height than they. We have heard nothing as yet from the other villages which surround the volcano, but it is now reported that the rain of sand round Chupaca and Chuquisaca has extended causing much havoc, over forty miles towards the sea.
    “The bed of the strong river Tambo had been filled by sand in the short space of a day and a night, so that the river has overflown its banks with such violence that it has spoiled the whole valley and rendered it barren.
    “In the valleys which are called Victor and Lignas, whole streams of sand have rooted up the houses and the huts, and they have also covered to a great extent the vines and the oil-trees. Taken all in all, this marvellous story is utterly unbelievable. Great damage has been done to the cattle, for unless it rains they must perish, as even now they are already dropping and dying in large numbers.”
    Here ends the letter from Arequipa.
    The ships which arrived across the sea were swept upon by the rain of sand between Arica and Chile, and brought to such straits that the mariners and other people on board did not know what would come out of this heavy, dark stormwind. Word has been received from Potosi that the sand and the ashes have reached as far as there. When one reflects upon this, all places up to one hundred and forty miles from here are covered in sand. And if all places are to be counted in circumference of earth and sea, then the rain of sand spreads for over six hundred, forsooth, for over a thousand miles. That the noise was also heard two hundred miles away was so curious that the Fathers of the College in Arequipa truly considered this as the labour and work of the evil spirits, for, however strong it may be, no one can hear thunder more than eight or ten miles off. The letter quoted above was brought hither on the 1st day of May and it was announced that the stormy weather still holds. May the Lord God take pity on this kingdom and I pray your Reverence to commend it faithfully to Divine Omnipotence. A final cordial greeting to your Reverence.
    From Lima, 22nd day of May anno 1600.
                            BARTHOLOMEUS DESCOUART.

222. The Execution of the Earl of Essex
        Antwerp
        23 March 1601
    It is written from London that Lord Essex, together with one of his most distinguished companions, belonging to the nobility, has been beheaded there in the Tower. This, however, is kept quite secret, as the causes of the conspiracy against the Queen likewise are not yet divulged. It is also said that the Queen has not confiscated the estates of the Earl, but has given them as a present to his young son, whose godmother she is, from which it is gathered that she is graciously disposed towards this young Earl.
        Cologne, 4 March 1601
    Letters from Amsterdam report that the executioner who carried out the sentence on Lord Essex with the axe was frightened to such an extent, that he first of all slashed the Earl through the shoulder, then through the head and lastly through the neck and this in most grisly fashion. Great sorrow has been excited thereby not only in England, but also in Holland and Zeeland among the common people, for the said Earl was greatly devoted and attached to his religion.

223. Journeyings in the Olden Days
        Frankfurt
        10 April 1601
    There is nothing new here. The Margrave of Ansbach has arrested on his territory all the merchants who, with their goods, were travelling together from Nuremberg to Frankfurt. However, the next day he released them and allowed them to proceed on their journey. Four of the most respectable merchants of Nuremberg, namely Baumgartner, Pfaundt, Schwenigshöfer and Ketzer, were retained as hostages and as a security, because the town of Nuremberg had imprisoned, twelve days earlier, one of the captains of the Margrave, Scharenberg by name. The said captain had dangerously wounded a woman through a sword thrust. What will ensue from this time will show.

224. Persecution of Jews sin Prague
        Prague
        5 April 1601
    A short time ago there died here the Jew Meisel. Notwithstanding that he had left His Imperial Majesty ten thousand florins, and much cash also to the Hospital for poor Christians and Jews, His Imperial Majesty on the following Saturday, viz. the Sabbath of the Jews, ordered Herr von Sternberg, at that time President of the Bohemian Chamber, to enter the Jew’s house forcibly and to seize everything there was. The widow of Meisel handed this over willingly, for she had already set aside and hidden the best part of the treasure. That which was taken away came to forty-five thousand florins in cash, besides all manner of other things, such as silver plate, promissory notes, jewels, clothes and all kinds of coins. After this, however, the President, against whom the Jewess and the sons of the two brothers of Meisel had raised a strong protest to the privy councillors, was not satisfied with all this money and booty, and no doubt at the command of His Majesty, once more broke into the house at night. The son of one of the brothers was taken prisoner, secretly led away and tortured in such guise that he confessed to the executioners, as a result of which the following substance was handed to the Bohemian Chamber:
80,000 ordinary single ducats of 2 florins apiece make  . 160,000 florins.
  5,000 pure golden Portugalese of 20 florins apiece make   . 100,000 florins.
15,000 pure golden Rosenobles of 4 florins 5 kreuzer 
    apiece make . . . . . .   61,250 florins.
30,000 turnip ducats of 2 florins apiece, make  . .   60,000 florins.
10,000 Styrian ducats of 2 florins apiece make  . .   20,000 florins.
60,000 silver thalers of 70 kreuzer apiece make . .   70,000 florins.
Together with the above-mentioned   . . . .   45,000 florins
    Make altogether . . . . . 516,250 florins.

225. Punishment for the Fall of Kanizsa
        Vienna
        10 October 1601
    Colonel Paradeiser was wont to have with him a jester who waited upon him at table and fetched and carried the dishes. Upon the 9th day of this month Herr Paradeiser donned the jester’s clothes and came down as far as the third stairs. But when the guard noticed that he had taken to his heels and that he was not the jester, they pursued him and again took him back to his place of imprisonment. There they now keep even closer watch over him.
        Vienna, undated
    Paradeiser’s speech before his decapitation:
    Whereas according to the will of God and that of the Supreme Authorities I shall and must die on this day, I acknowledge myself before God and before the whole world to be a sinful creature, and that I well deserve temporal and eternal punishment. I have felt from the bottom of my heart real and veritable contrition and sorrow, and for that reason beg every one, and God also, for compassion and Christian forgiveness. But violence and injustice are being done to me before God and by the Supreme Temporal Authorities because I shall and must die on account of the Castle of Kanizsa, which was entrusted to me. Never was I convicted of this wrong and with a clear conscience I consider myself innocent before them, because I remained steadfast against the enemy of the name of Christ. This I plead here and in after life before the Countenance and the Throne of Judgment of Jesus Christ, before His Imperial majesty, before His Royal Highness’s Council of War and before all those who in this world have passed such judgment upon me, so that the righteous Judge Almighty may demand of them vengeance for my innocent blood. I am now ready to die and commend my spirit and soul into the hands of God, the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost. So be it. Amen.

226. Terrible Tidings from Rima-Szombath in Upper Hungary
Rima-Szombath
          6 April 1601
    Above the river Bodrog, near Lica, there were seen and heard wondrous signs, to wit the sound of trumpets, whereupon two powerful hosts attacked each other and shot with heavy cannon. This caused large cannon balls to fall upon the earth, so that the people who were working in the vineyards could find no refuge but had to run from one place to another and hide. This is also imputed to the priests of Ungvár, and in confirmation thereof Báthory has examined forty persons from that neighbourhood who had witnessed and confirmed it.

227. Bankruptcy in Antwerp
        Antwerp
        25 May 1601
    During the past Sunday an Italian of the name of Melchior Nigroni left this town in all secrecy for Paris, and, since he has appointed no attorney to handle his affairs, his creditors, with the permission of the authorities, entered his house, in order to examine his bills of exchange. These were found to balance with his books. Nevertheless apprehension is felt that there may accrue from one place or another many bills and drafts made out by him, which may be the cause for his absenting himself. For this reason a serious bankruptcy is feared.

228. A Lansquenet Bears a Child
        Piadena in Italy
        26 May 1061
    A weird happening has occurred in the case of a lansquenet named Daniel Burghammer, of the squadron of Captain Burkhard Laymann zu Liebenau, of the honourable Madrucci Regiment in Piadena, in Italy. When the same was on the point of going to bed one night he complained to his wife, to whom he had been married by the Church seven years ago, that he had great pains in his belly and felt something stirring therein. An hour thereafter he gave birth to a child, a girl. When his wife was made aware of this, she notified the occurrence at once. Thereupon he was examined and questioned as to how this had come to pass. He then confessed on the spot that he was half man and half woman and that for more than seven years he had served as a soldier in Hungary and the Netherlands; in proof whereof he produced his genuine passport. When he was born he was christened as a boy and given in baptism the name of Daniel. In his youth he learnt the handicraft of a smith, which until this day he had practised simultaneously with his soldiering. He also stated that while in the Netherlands he only slept once with a Spaniard, and he became pregnant therefrom. This, however, he kept a secret unto himself and also from his wife, with whom he had for seven years lived in wedlock, but he had never been able to get her with child. When the aforesaid Captain heard of this he informed the Church authorities, who thereupon sent a notary to ascertain the facts and report thereon. After this event had been proved in this wise, the christening of the child was finally ordered to take place. Herr Reitner, Ensign from Wenigarten, in lieu and stead of the Captain, stood sponsor with several noble ladies at the christening of the child, which was named Elizaabeth. This christening was celebrated with many ceremonies and in the presence of soldiery, such as drummers, pipers and three trumpeters. Many noted men and women in the nobility as well as five hundred soldiers accompanied the child home again from the christening. The aforesaid soldier is able to suckle the child with his right breast only and not at all on the left side, where he is a man. He has also the natural organs of a man for passing water. Both are well, the child is beautiful, and many towns have already wished to adopt it, which however, has not as yet been arranged. All this has been set down and described by notaries. It is considered in Italy to be a great miracle and is to be recorded in the chronicles. The couple, however, are to be divorced by the clergy.

229. Persians are Baptized in Rome     
        Rome
        9 June 1601
    Last Wednesday the Persian Ambassador left this town together with some of his retinue. In addition to the honours already accorded to him, the Pope presented him with three thousand crowns. Before the departure of the Persian, however, three of his servitors, his secretary, his barber and his cook, separated themselves from him in order to remain here and be baptized in the Christian Faith. The Pope is to give them ten crowns monthly, and he is in hopes that the King of Persia may likewise abandon the Musullman Faith.

230. The Siege of Ostend
        Antwerp
        13 February 1604
    Good hopes are still entertained of Ostend, because the Marquess Spinola with great assiduity is pushing on the completion of the water palisades on which he is placing cannon in order to prevent the ingress and the egress of shipping. If this can be achievd he will soon conquer the fortress. But this week as is reported by letters from Bruges, the north-east wind brought a further forty ships with soldiers, victuals and ammunition to Ostend. A week ago the besieged and our men are said to have caused each other much damage with great cannon from night until the following forenoon, each side losing many of their men. Time will show who sustained the heaviest losses.

231. A Joust in Vienna
        Vienna
        12 March 1604
    Last Sunday we had here a magnificent tournament and tilting at the ring, accompanied by wonderful pageants. Among others there came one von Tiefenbach with one hundred fenceres, poor, blind, crooked and lame mendicants in rags and tatters, just as they sit in the streets and beg for charity. He himself headed the procession disguised as a beggar, wearing garments of many colours and full of stains. They all shouted for alms. It was a sight passing strange, such as had never been witnessed before in this town. To some it gave pleasure, but to others it caused annoyance.

232. Expulsion of the Catholics from England
        Brussels
        27 March 1604
    It is also reported that all Catholics are to leave England on pain of death. Should any one of this religion be met with in future, all his property and fortune are to go to his nearest friends. It is a subtle scheme to induce one friend to denounce the other, wherefrom it will be gathered what is to be expected from this King.

233. Incendiaries in Bohemia
        Prague
        4 July 1604
    After there had been many fires caused by the doings of wicked people, not only in the Prague cities, but also in the whole of Bohemia and great damage had been done, the magistrate here intended to execute some of the incendiaries. But since that night a further seven of these miscreants were brought in, and therefore the execution of the first evil-doers was postponed so that the others might be examined all the better.
    Only a few days ago, His Imperial Majesty had had arrested an artist and alchemist, Philip Jacob Güstenhöver of Offenburg, together with an Englishman and cast them int6o the White Tower. Rumour has it that they are to be taken to Castle Pürglitz.

234. Tribute for the Pope
        Rome
        3 July 1604
    On the day of Peter and Paul, after the Pope had heard Mass in the Capella Clementina and was about to return home, he received through the Spanish Ambassador, underneath the porch of St. Peter, the usual bills of tribute from the King of Naples, namely seven thousand crowns. This Ambassador was accompanied to his palace by five hundred mounted soldiery, among them many noble princes, counts, squires and thirty-six prelates. These, as well as the Ambassadors of His Imperial Majesty, of the King of France, of the Venetian Government and of the Duke of Savoy, he kept with him and treated to a banquet that cost more than four thousand crowns. This palace was entirely hung with gold and silver tapestries, worth a great fortune. In the palace yard there had been erected a fountain wherefrom flowed throughout the day the best of wines. The most delicious dishes were served on silver and gilt vessels and also many beautiful show dishes made of sugar, triumphal arches, castles, pyramids and all kinds of animals were put upon the tables and later on distributed among the Ambassadors.

235. Attempt to Poison Henry IV
        Venice
        16 July 1604
    From Lyons is written the following news: It is reported from Paris that the King of France wished to partake of Holy Communion on the day of Corpus Christi and had already opened his mouth to receive the Host. Suddenly a dog appeared, who pulled the King backwards, so that he could not take the sacred wafer. When the King, the second time, prepared himself to receive Holy Communion, the said dog once more prevented him from partaking of the Host and pulled him back. Thereupon the King commanded the priest to receive the Host himself. The latter refused, whereupon the King ordered him in all earnestness to do so. When the priest had taken it he swelled out and burst in two, because this wafer alone had been poisoned and not the others. Thus it was that a plot was discovered, and several of the most noble participants have been imprisoned in the Bastille.

236. Madame d’Entraigues’ Plot
        Rome
        25 July 1604
    From France there arrives the report that Madame d’Entraigues has decided secretly to send her five-year-old son, whom she begat with the King of France, to Spain and to surrender the city of Nantes likewise to the King of Spain, all this with the assistance of her father and the Count of Auvergne. This plot was revealed to His Majesty, whereupon he caused the Count of Auvergne as well as three other councillors to be arrested. Madame d’Entraigues he forgave because she was his mistress. The Count of Auvergne fled from the Court, the King sent him with his sons and daughters to St. Germain to be kept in safe custody there.

237. The Persian Embassy in Prague
        Prague
        26 July 1604
    On the 20th day of this month the Persian Ambassador with his retinue had audience of His Majesty. When he arrived the Persians sought to kiss his right foot. But His Majesty did not wish to permit this and offered his hand alone. After the Ambassador had presented his respects he withdrew with a deep obeisance. Thereupon His Majesty also invited the suite to salute him, and they promptly approached on their knees and kissed his foot. This Ambassador and his following are being magnificently entertained.
    These days a young Herr von Schönberg, whose late father was Field-Marshal in France, was most pitifully wounded and hacked about in such fashion that he had twenty wounds in the neck alone, and forty wounds and cuts on his body and his head. He was on his way to the house of Messer Adam Popel to make love to his spouse.
        Prague, 2 August 1604
    The Persian Ambassador gave latterly a magnificent banquet. On that occasion he was questioned by His Majesty and others as to how the air in this country suited him. The Ambassador made reply to this that he had not felt very well, but that since he had paid his respects to His Imperial Majesty, he was fully recovered. Thereupon the Emperor ordered a large goblet of wine to be handed to him and desired that a toast should go round to the health of His Holiness the Pope, His Imperial majesty and the King of Spain, further expressing the wish that he should also quaff a draught on behalf of the other kings, such as those of Poland, of England and the rulers of Venice. Since, however, he is more of a Mohammedan than a Christian, this he refused to do.

238. The Fall of the Fortress of Ostend
        Antwerp
        24th day of September 1604
    The fortress of Ostend, which had been beleaguered for three years and two and a half months, has just been surrendered by agreement into the hands of Spinola. Upon the 22nd day of this month, at 10 o’clock of the forenoon, two thousand five hundred soldiers of the General States marched, with all their arms and four pieces of heavy ordinance, upon the town of Sluys. Although Count Moritz of Nassau, as is reported in letters from Middelburg dated the 14th, set forth by ship with twenty thousand men on horseback and on foot as well as with twenty-four cannon, for which journey twenty thousand loaves had been supplied to him in Zeeland, he was unable on account of a head wind, and also of the heavy firing from Spinola’s palisade, to land in the port of Ostend, in which there were most of his men.
    Since the troops of the General States, terrified by the constant firing, were unable to resist any longer, they were obliged at last to surrender.

239. The Establishment of the Dutch in Brazil
        Antwerp
        12 November 1604
    We have tidings from Amsterdam that two merchant ships from Brazil have arrived there with sugar. They bring the news that the five men-of-war with many soldiers on board, as well as the two ships with munitions and provisions which were last March to accompany the ships sailing from East India, remained in Brazil. There they have robbed all the ships laden with sugar, taken from them four thousand cases and pillaged all the inhabitants. They remained on the mainland of Brazil for six weeks, and then decided to build a fort at a place called Bahia and to retain possession of the country.

240. Extraordinary Occurrence at the Imperial Court of Prague
        Vienna
        8 December 1604
    From foreign parts comes the news that, a short while ago, His Imperial Majesty wished to betake himself to his apartments through the corridor at his right hand. Thereupon the eagle, who has his stand in the courtyard by the cistern of the fountain, flew towards His Majesty through the corridor and into his own chamber. There, upon a take, a snow-white dove was to be seen, whereat His Majesty was greatly surprised, for it was unknown to him that white doves were bred in that part of the country. When this was bruited about, elderly people were heard to remark that during the lifetime of the second Kaiser Maximilian a white dove had also shown itself in his chamber, coming from the blue, and this just before His Majesty had travelled to Regensburg to the opening of Parliament, where he gently passed away in the Lord shortly hereafter. But since nothing of this matter has been reported from Prague, it cannot be easily believed.

268. More Troops and Money for the Low Countries
                            Cologne
                            July 16, 1587
    Letters of the 10th inst. from Middelburg report that the Earl of Leicester has arrived there from England. With him in twelve vessels have come the Admiral of England, a Field-Marshal, and also a number of courtiers. Thirty-two companies of soldiers may be expected any day. The Earl of Leicester is said to have brought £30,000 in cash. Two of Drake’s large vessels appear to have reached London. Their Captains had sailed away owing to disputes with Drake. They have been imprisoned. Three of the Queen’s ships, some pinnaces and six big merchantmen are to be sent to Drake from London with all speed.

269. Drake at Plymouth with his Spoil
                            Antwerp
                            July 25, 1587
    London letters of the 14th inst. announce that Captain Drake has arrived at Plymouth with four of the Queen’s ships, leaving the rest off Cape St. Vincent or thereabouts. He brings a great ship of four hundred tons or more which came from Portuguese India, laden with pepper and other spices. This ship is valued at a million or over. Still more vessels are being fitted out in England for Drake to sail with, as it is desired he should lie in wait for the Peru fleet. The talk in London is that some one has come to Court bringing peace proposals from the King of Spain.
    Further letters from London allege that the ship brought in by Drake belongs to the King of Spain, and that His Majesty himself had her built in Lisbon after the conquest of Portugal and named the San Philip. This ship took over the cargo of another, the San Lorenzo, from Calicut, as the latter had sprung a leak. This is why her cargo is so valuable. We are told that six hundred and fifty-nine passengers were aboard this vessel, but Drake put them off on the Azores with their baggage. She carried also twenty-two brass guns and a large number of iron ones.
    Letters came yesterday from Lisbon to say that Drake has taken another ten or eleven vessels coming from Brazil. This will be a heavy loss for the merchants. The Portuguese here declare that the San Philip brought for the King four hundred thousand ducats, as a new gold mine has been discovered from which this gold was won.

270. Leicester’s Troops leave Zeeland
                            Antwerp
                            August 1, 1587
    The Earl of Leicester recently brought most of his troops out of Zeeland and embarked them, so that some hundred or more vessels full of soldiers were along the Flanders coast. He intended to put them ashore for the relief of the small town of Sluis, but owing to the vigorous resistance of our forces he failed and sailed back again.
    They write from Hamburg that an envoy from the King of Spain has come to the King of Denmark, and the King of Spain seems to have asked the King of Denmark to negotiate peace with the Queen of England.

271. Difficulties over the Division of the Spoil
                            Cologne
                            August 20, 1587
    A report come from Hamburg that the Queen of England has sent three Earls and others to discuss terms of peace with the Prince of Parma. The ships from India, which have not yet been unloaded at Plymouth, are lying there still, as nobody knows how to divide the spoil between the Queen and the freebooters. It is confirmed that quantities of gold, silver and precious stones as well as other things are on board. Some more vessels are being got ready for Drake.
    Robert Cecil and a young Spencer were sent to the Netherlands to prepare for the coming of the negotiators of peace.

272. Settlement of Differences between the States General and the English
                            Antwerp
                            August 22, 1587
    The cargo of the ship from Calicut is being sold in London, and this is no omen for an early peace. The Queen of England has caused obsequies costing over £3000 to be performed for the Queen of Scotland. As the English fear the Prince of Parma will besiege the town of Bergen-op-Zoom, they have garrisoned it strongly, and seem to be pitching a camp there. They have also burnt down two villages which stood too near the town.
    They write from Middelburg that the States General were entertained last Sunday at the Earl of Leicester’s, and have come to an amicable arrangement with him. He is to administer everything, and the States will render full obedience and all aid with troops and money. An order seems also to have been issued forbidding on pain of death any slander of the States General or the English.

273. Impressing Crews
                            Cologne
                            September 11, 1587
    Orders have been issued at Middelburg that no ship may sail westwards alone. But eight vessels may sail in concert under escort. Moreover, trade seems to be permitted freely with Spain, though the merchants distrust the Spaniards. They fear confiscation. Permission appears also to have been granted for the import of several kinds of merchandise into Antwerp, only however after payment of the prescribed licence. The ship San Philip has been discharged in England, but her cargo is not yet sold. Horatio Pallavicini is said to have intended to dispose of it. All vessels in London are being detained, but for the most part let go again. This appears to be done merely to get crews, as sixteen Queen’s ships are to go to sea, besides thirty more for Drake.
    Horazio Pallavicini (Sir Horatio Pallavicini), merchant and diplomatist, d. 1600, a scion of the well-known Pallavicini family. His father before him was settled in England and an eminent merchant. Horatio’s business was on a great scale, extending all over the world. He lent money to Elizabeth, Henry IV, and the Low Countries at high rates of interest. Elizabeth was so heavily indebted to him that the fate of the country was often in his hands. In 1587 he was knighted by Elizabeth. At the time of the Armada his services were very great. He tried to persuade Alexander Farnese to instal himself as sovereign of the Netherlands in opposition to Philip II. Elizabeth repeatedly employed him on important diplomatic missions to the continent. His family was related by marriage to that of Cromwell.


274. The Scotch Border
                            Antwerp
                            September 13, 1587
    The rumour is circulating that the King of Scots has burnt some villages and hamlets belonging to the Queen of England. Also that the King of Scots is to marry a Danish Princess. With this object some emissaries of his have arrived in Denmark and have been magnificently received.

275. The Peru Fleet arrives safely
                            Antwerp
                            September 16, 1587
    Urgent letters from Spain of the 4th inst. report that the Marquis de Santa Cruz has arrived with the entire Peru fleet, one hundred and seventeen vessels in all. Moreover two ships from Calicut have reached the Azores in safety. It is hoped that he has by now reached Seville and Lisbon unharmed. The Peru fleet is said to be bringing fourteen millions in gold and silver and over three millions in merchandise. This is indeed a great sum.

276. The Peru Fleet arrives safely
                            Madrid
                            October 4, 1587
    The Marquis of Santa Cruz for Scotland
    The fleet from Peru and New Spain has reached San Lucar, with the exception of the three ships which have put in to Lisbon. Three vessels were lost during their entrance to San Lucar, but it is hoped to recover the gold and silver in them. A gentleman of importance appears to have been despatched to Seville by His Majesty, and it is said that, as a contribution to the Armada about to be assembled by His Majesty, he is to levy a tax of five per cent. on everything brought over by this fleet, presumably amounting to seventeen millions. This is a large sum, and will probably come to as much as the fleet has cost. The Marquis is supposed also to aim at effecting some sales and thus making as much money as possible. The Marquis de Santa Cruz seems to have been ordered by His Majesty not to land and not to disembark his men. The Cardinal of Austria went out to meet him with two galleys and has no doubt delivered His Majesty’s command verbally. It is thought certain that, as soon as he is supplied with ships and other requirements, he will sail to Scotland, as the King there is in revolt against the Queen of England. It is announced, too, that His Majesty is sending Vespasian Contaga to the Netherlands because he wants the Prince of Parma to be available for the expedition against England.
    Vespasiano Gonzaga, Duca di Sabionetta, an Italian-born General in Spanish service, 1531-1591.

277. Will not Elizabeth break with the United Provinces?
                            Antwerp
                            October 10, 1587
    In letters from London of the 29th ult. received here today it is announced that the Queen has already nominated Commissioners to conduct the peace negotiations. Others again write that nothing has been heard of this. Recent news from Holland is that the Earl of Leicester has parted in high dudgeon from the States General at The Hague and is gone to Dordrecht. He appears to have dismissed from forty to fifty companies of English soldiers and to intend to leave for England. Then the States will have to look after themselves. Count Maurice of Nassau and the Count von Hohenlohe refuse to join Leicester. This has caused great discord in Holland and Zeeland. What His Highness aims at is that the Queen of England should break with the United Provinces, in order that His Highness may all the more quickly reduce them to obedience.

278. Don Antonio at Constantinople
                            Constantinople
                            October 14, 1587
    It is reported that a distinguished Portuguese nobleman, under pretext of searching for prisoners and setting them at liberty, has succeeded in obtaining permission for Don Antonio to come to this place. His intermediaries were two Jews, the Sultan’s best informants, who keep him posted in events all over Christendom. Don Antonio, disguised and incognito, is to journey here from England by Danzig through Poland and Moldavia. The Portuguese has already started to meet him with a Turkish courier, and Don Antonio is to be sent at the cost of the Sultan from here to Cairo and thence through Persian waters to the East Indies, to try his luck there, and if possible to take India away again from the King of Spain. As a vassal of the Porte, he is to send from that country to the harbours of the Sultan all spices and other Indian goods at present exported to Portugal, and is to forward handsome gifts here as tribute every year. The affair has been carried through in the utmost secrecy, and the two Jews and others held council over it one day for hours behind locked doors with the Grand Vizier and the Beglerbey of Greece. Now whether anything will come of this matter time will show.

279. Embargo on English Goods at Antwerp
                            Antwerp
                            October 17, 1587
    The King has forbidden entry to all manufactured articles hitherto imported from England, Holland and Zeeland, or brought on ships recently arrived from Hamburg. In future no such commodities may be introduced unless accompanied by certificates of purchase or production in towns or districts within the King’s obedience. Consequently many people producing these commodities have migrated from Holland and Zeeland into Artois, Hainault and Flanders. Three days ago vessels came in here with general cargo, but only by licence. After the expiry of three months no English cloth or article of dress may be sold here. The veto is not yet printed, but will be the day after to-morrow.

280. Don Antonio may be useful, but is he at Constantinople?
                        Constantinople
                        31 October, 1587
    The new Venetian ambassador will be here within four days and the old one leaves a fortnight later. The matter of Don Antonio of Portugal is certainly being pushed forward with vigour, but whether he is already on his way here, as many declare, is unknown. But it is correct that Hassan Pasha is advocating it strongly with the Sultan and Grand Vizier. He is the greatest corsair of them all now, and is to be entrusted with the control of all Barbary. Hassan pasha wants the Sultan not to abandon this enterprise, even if he has to spend his own money on it, or if Don Antonio should display no desire for East India. If the Sultan would pay for it, help could in any case be given to the Portuguese, and Hassan Pasha has promised to see to this himself from Barbary. But whether a gentleman so strongly averse to expenditure will show any alacrity about this remains to be seen.

281. English Soldiers near Bonn lift Electoral Cattle
                            Cologne
                            November 5, 1587
    A week ago English soldiers from Wachtendonk out looting captured and carried off, between here and Bonn, 300 oxen belonging to the Electors of Cologne, Mayence and Treves. They cut down the twenty-five Bonn soldiers convoying the beasts.

282. War Preparations and Suspicions
                            Antwerp
                            November 5, 1587
    As the King of Spain is arming so heavily at Lisbon and Biscay and assembling a powerful fleet, the Queen of England also is arming heavily, for it is considered certain that the King of Spain will send his Armada to Scotland since the King of that country seems to have risen against the Queen of England and to have promised the King of Spain a port for his vessels to take shelter in. Thus an expedition against England may well be undertaken and the peace negotiations have fallen through again. Another strong reason is that the States General of Holland and Zeeland have quarrelled so vehemently with the Earl of Leicester. The States declare that the Queen is trying to come to terms with the King of Spain without their knowledge and consent. This is why the Earl of Leicester wished to occupy the Holland towns with English soldiers, so as to be ready to surrender them with the greater ease. They declare that the Earl of Leicester greatly wished to introduce English soldiers into the city of Leyden, but the Mayor and Corporation would not allow it, so by command of the Earl of Leicester two Captains and a government official were beheaded. It is believed that the States General will conclude a separate peace with the Prince of Parma, but what will come of this is unknown.

283. War Preparations and Suspicions
          Delight of the Hollanders at the Departure of the English
                            Antwerp
                            November 21, 1587
    Of the vessels being built here four large ones are already complete and lying in the Scheldt. The rest are being pressed forward and worked at even on holidays, but it is not thought they will be ready before Christmas. Among these ships one is especially powerful, and on the poop in Latin characters is written “Lord Jesus, show me Thy Way!”  This ship is not for use in the river but at sea. Although it was thought that this armament was only directed against England, news has just now come that the Duke of Parma has put up his camp outside the town of Ostend, as the Beggars are also to be feared and the forts along the Scheldt have been filled by the States General with eighteen companies of fresh troops. Three days ago the Hollanders fired many guns from their fleet because their agreement with England is determined and the Earl of Leicester is actually to send his English soldiers home again. It is announced here too that the Earl of Leicester has already arrived at Flushing and the treaty with England is only for defensive purposes.

284. Inducements to be held out to the Turks to join in the War
                            Constantinople
                            November 26, 1587
    The English ambassador has received instructions from His Gracious Queen that he is recalled unexpectedly and, as some asseverate, in disfavour. But the ambassador declares he has himself requested His Gracious Queen’s permission to return home, in order that he may explain the exact state of affairs here by word of mouth, and persuade the Queen to induce the Sultan to support her against the King of Spain with all his power.

285. Santa Cruz beats the English near Ragusa
                            Constantinople
                            November 28, 1587
    On the last day of last month a special courier came from Ragusa bringing definite news that the Marquis de Santa Cruz met the English Armada of forty ships, sank twenty-six and captured the remaining fourteen. It is credibly reported that the Sultan and, as was plainly to be seen, all the Viziers were startled at this, and as timid as though their own fleet had been beaten by the Christians in the Archipelago. They at once sent for the Ragusan envoy, cross-questioned him in open Divan, had his letters translated, and found that the news was confirmed.

286. Turkish Preparations for War
                            Constantinople
                            December 9, 1587
    Ibrahim Pasha is having heavy work executed here in the Arsenal on the pretext that he is to take the sea in person with a large fleet. But those who know, especially those who hold important positions in the Arsenal, consider this impossible. But since the Sultan receives much injury from Christian pirates every day, and the Venetian ambassador and other good Christians encourage him daily, it is rather thought some fifty galleys will move out from here and cruise in the Archipelago and along the Barbary coast. One hundred and fifty small vessels are to sail out and devastate the territory of the King of Spain. But it is thought more likely they will sail merely wherever they can find the most plunder and will try to prevent the King of Spain’s fleet from getting out.

287. Armada Preparations
                            Cologne
                            December 24, 1587
    The presumption in Brussels is that the vessels being pressed forward at Antwerp and other places are to sail next year against England. Four regiments of German mercenaries are to be put on board them. So next spring there will be strange doings enough, since the King of Scots has declared himself the enemy of the Queen of England and probably has an understanding with the King of Spain.

288. The Armada must sail and it cannot fail
unknown
unknown
                    background: Address by Cavaliere Fra Tiburtio Spanocchi to the Catholic King on the Expedition against England.
    The wrong inflicted by that corsair Drake upon Spain and thus upon the world at large fills me with longing to see him chastised. Zeal for the service of Your Majesty impels me to compose in this letter a brief address. I implore pardon for my presumption and a kindly recognition of the goodness and honesty of my intentions in submitting my address. Your Majesty will be able to understand from it as a good Prince, Christian and Friend of Peace, why it is so urgent for me to help Your Majesty to guard Your own interests. The preservation of Your possessions is effected by good relations with Your vassals and subjects and by the protection of the colonies and Catholic fortifications upon which those who desire to thwart the plans of Your Majesty have designs. There are countless instances of Princes of antiquity and the present time to prove, if they had occasion, that a powerful King, desirous of maintaining his own, can choose no better way than that of conquest, or, to speak in terms of statecraft, such a King must increase his dominion. The reasons will be the clearer to Your Majesty inasmuch as no other Prince rules over so vast a territory and as the greater portion of Your Majesty’s power consists of moveable articles, such as the Indian fleet in the Colonies, which lies before the fortresses and in the important harbours which it has to defend. These possessions bring to Your Majesty an increase of power. But we now see this corsair in no wise content with disquieting the world. He pillages our storehouses and is unlikely to confine himself to the feats already accomplished. Moreover he will have imitators who will be drawn on by the rich booty and impelled by the malice of neighbouring potentates. I conceive therefore that the best means to the repose of the States of Your Majesty lies in an expedition against England, the country which is so grievously harming our trade with India. From the Levant no danger threatens to hinder this project. Moreover, the neighbours of Spain are so preoccupied with their internal difficulties that they cannot interfere with us. On religious grounds many Princes are on Your Majesty’s side. To His Holiness the Pope and to many other Christian Princes the expedition against England will be especially welcome, more so to His Holiness than to any other Prince. The Pope will support Your Majesty with troops, money and ships and render our victory certain. By the special mercy of heaven Your Majesty, like other Christian Princes, has at the present moment a large number of galleys and galleasses at disposal, sufficient for a powerful army and a great fleet. Indeed, there lie in our harbours so many ships that they would suffice for the subjection of a far greater realm than that of England. Your Majesty has Captains General, soldiers by water and by land, confident of victory and thirsting for war on behalf of Christendom. Moreover Your Majesty is entitled The Catholic King. With You is Justice and it generally brings victory. The right stands upon the side of Your Majesty, for the foe by their misdeeds have caused this war. The soldiers will go into this war gladly and gaily for the sake of the rich booty, and then Spain will become the richest land upon earth. Elizabeth has but few soldiers and no fortifications, for King Henry, her father, forbade them to be built. We know that Cæsar advanced upon Britain with but a few thousand men and horses, but the world was then less thickly populated than now. But let us ignore this when fighting is in question and a fleet fit to guard our possessions must be maintained. The feelings of all men are against England, and never has there been a better cause for war than the increase of our empire by the subjection of England in so short a time and with such great renown. In God’s name let us not fear the dangers of the voyage, but keep before our eyes the vast numbers of our vessels, and tell ourselves that England has not been able to equip more than 40 ships. We must believe withal that she has done her utmost and knows well that the other fleets were no stronger than her own. It is clear also that she has only armed her fleet to rob and to maraud. In all she can gather together but 200 vessels, and craven souls should bear in mind that the greater portion of them are fit for piracy, but unfit to meet our expeditionary force at sea. When one considers the insolence of this Drake in face of our soldiers, he might, relying on our long-suffering and on his own resources, grow even more insolent in future. Some day amid his looting he will fall into our net despite our indecision. The courage of the English at sea is nothing great, for, in the engagement fought by the Marquis de Santa Cruz against the French off the island of St. Michael’s, the English vessels were the first to flee. May Your Majesty unbridle your wrath and confirm thereby the pride of your soldiers and strengthen the valiance of our souls. We are weary of agreements with faithless people or rather with a woman who keeps no law. those men are led on more and more by the bait of the wealth of India. Since a royal expedition cannot be kept a secret it were more fitting, after the fashion of the ancient Romans, to proclaim it by herald, that other princes may be unable to say that we act in secret. The enemy will have to bear great expenditure in money if the necessity is imposed upon him of summoning foreign aid into his dominion. This will bring to pass the entire destruction of his provinces, especially because foreign auxiliaries have often in the past established themselves permanently in those places to which they have been summoned. An example of this is England itself, which derives its name Anglia from the tribes which were once called in to help and then made themselves masters of the whole country. If they call in many troops they will have to face vast expenditure and I know how empty the Queen’s treasury is. I know also the cost of only one single regiment of German mercenaries, and this is the only nation they can make use of, as the French are entirely taken up with internal quarrels. As for the feelings of the people in this case, one can say that this Queen will be even more detested by her own subjects than she now is, as she alone will be the cause of all the troubles they will have to bear. The Queen’s subjects then will open the door to us. those who are now lying quiet but who have suffered most grievously, the Catholics, will, although I do not care to trust them blindly, in all probability make some sort of diversion in our favour.
    There are three methods of getting quit of the enemy, if foreign potentates should make an attempt to annoy Your Majesty from some other quarter. The first method is an expedition by sea, after calling up immense numbers of foreign troops, the second method is the defence of the continent, and the third and least promising method would be to decide for a combination of the first two, as then the land and sea forces would be scattered. If Your Majesty will trust the sea alone, our superior numbers in ships and men will in my opinion ensure certain victory. The goodness of our ships, in this alternative the most important point, will suffice to meet any fleet likely to assemble in those northern waters. Our fleet must be composed as follows:
    60 sailing ships, carrying 300 soldiers apiece. .  .  18,000 men
    25 large galleys built on the Portuguese model, 400 apiece  .  10,000 men
      6 galleasses, carrying 500 men apiece.   .  .  .    3,000 men
    40 galleys, carrying 100 men apiece.   .  .  .  .    4,000 men
    40 pinnaces, carrying   .  .  .  .  .  .    3,000 men
    All of these from Biscay.
    This makes a total of 171 vessels. In addition to the forces above enumerated we require 2000 sappers, and besides these 2000 horses will be of the utmost importance, since in that country they are lacking and the crossing from Spain is long enough to render the introduction of fresh horses difficult. It will be absolutely necessary to bring over from Flanders transport and cavalry which the Netherlands can furnish. As for artillery, munitions and other requirements of war, I presume that Your Majesty can easily give orders to ensure suitable provision.
    In this manner we can confront the enemy’s fleet with our Armada. It will suffice that we meet it with all our force, and it will please God to bless our victory as beseems our good right. We shall thus in a short while sail towards the middle of England, capture the nearest and most convenient harbour and there await the other ships which will be coming from Flanders and Spain. We must keep the sea safe for the galleys and galleasses which move to and fro between Spain and England and provide reinforcements. It is not probable that after the defeat of the English fleet another body of vessels will gather large enough to offer resistance, as the English will naturally have enough to do already and their other allies would have much trouble in equipping an Armada to annoy our own. This might happen if we were not successful at the first onset. If our ships do not reach the shore at an entirely safe harbour, it may be assumed that later on they will find one that is satisfactory and suitable for fortification. There they will build a fortress and with all diligence prepare their defence. It would be wise to advance with our entire army into the enemy’s capital, that is to say London. The sea fight will not be so bloody as not to leave 25,000 soldiers for the purpose. In this case the Captain General will have to proceed according to the condition of his own troops and those of the enemy. If he should find the enemy brave, and this seems to me an overbold assumption, since large populations which for many years have had no sudden invasion to meet are readily discouraged, they will certainly have no man of valour and decision. As an example, I adduce the Sack of Rome, carried out by the Bourbon, and the famous capture of Antwerp in our own times and of many other towns as well which had no such powerful armies at disposal as the above named. We must remember, too, the anguish of mind of the inhabitants of great towns which could not otherwise be taken by force of arms. But if the enemy should be resolved to defend their country themselves, they lack the strength and will be unable to prevent our troops from landing. An army with the qualities of the Spanish will moreover be a match for any opponent. therefore, if your Majesty’s sagacious Captain General understands his advantage as I have said, he will at once undertake the voyage, and the Queen of England has no India at her call to replace the cost.
    As the result of all considerations I can expect naught else than that your Gracious Majesty will take the honourable decision to declare war. It suffices to set foot on the enemy’s territory. As things stand to-day, for the repose of our people and the glory of Your Majesty, no settlement of our differences is possible. We cannot declare war under better or more desirable conditions, and even the harshest peace concluded after our army stands on foreign soil will be attributed to the kindness and clemency of Your Majesty. the vassals of Your Majesty great and small await with the utmost eagerness the opportunity of proving to Your Majesty their courage and their strength. This war will prove itself a good school for the young nobles who are growing soft in the dangerous leisure of the Court and of their own houses. Your Majesty will commend their rapidity of decision. Apart from the advantages which our empire will drive from it, the profits are so obvious as to outweigh the costs of the war. The English vex us to sorely, they impair our authority in so many quarters, that it is better to make war upon the enemy than to employ other remedies. France is so preoccupied with its civil war that it cannot check our expedition. It cannot scatter its forces either. It is difficult too to believe that for the advantage of others France will shed its vassals’ blood and lavish its funds. We know how hard it comes to the King to maintain himself with his own forces, and he can of a surety not help England. In consideration of the sagacity and military experience of our Captain General and the valour of the veteran soldiers in Your Majesty’s army, France will take good care not to interrupt our voyage or to meddle with our dispute.
    The timid will perhaps mention the Turk, but he is so menaced by Persians and Tartars that he is not in a position to occupy Christian fortresses. If with all his forces he proceeds against Malta he will meet so stout a defence that he will retire with loss. The Princes of Italy will unite against the common foe of Your Majesty, and they are so well provided with munitions and ships that there is in that sea no possibility of Your Majesty being disturbed in your expedition to chastise that Queen who has given such good cause for her chastisement.
    We are assured of the help of the Virgin Mary, and of Germany so grievously harried by the heretics. They have no reason for helping England, as they cannot suspect Your Majesty of designing at this moment to make yourself master of England. To conclude. The whole enterprise lies in the hands of God. Your Majesty has the right on your side and must decide one thing or the other. Be the result commended to God as on other occasions, and may He grant His Divine assistance to this Your Majesty’s enterprise.
    Rome was suddenly taken and sacked by an Imperial army under Charles, Duke of Bourbon, ex-Constable of France, in May 1527.
    In 1585, Antwerp was captured by the Duke of Parma after a long siege.

289. More Ships captured by the English
                            Antwerp
                            January 2, 1588
    His Highness continues to have much work done here on flat-bottomed boats and other war-vessels, but the destination of the expedition is still unknown. There is again silence about the English commissioners who were supposed to be coming over, and their non-appearance is thought to be the Duke of Parma’s fault for not yet signing their passports. This is caused by the Queen of England’s delay in despatching her commissioners. From Middelburg comes the announcement that the English have taken fifteen ships bound from Brazil to Lisbon and laden with sugar and other goods. They are said to have been worth two hundred thousand ducats. The Portuguese here are just now talking about them.

290. The Armada to sail in the Spring
                            Antwerp
                            January 23, 1588
    Letters from Lisbon of December 16 have been received here this week reporting that the Armada there is ready and that twenty thousand men are awaiting embarkation. It is, however, not supposed that they will sail before the spring. The English with thirty-five warships are lying off Cape St. Vincent not far from Lisbon, awaiting vessels which move to and fro and carrying off what they can. They are said to have done much damage to Algarvia by robbery and theft. The Armada takes no protective measures, and people wonder whether it does not intend to attack the English unexpectedly.



291. Peace Negotiations and Conscription
                            Antwerp
                            January 30, 1588
    An English emissary to the Duke of Parma arrived at Ghent last Sunday and requested His Highness to select a place of meeting for peace negotiations. The English leave the choice to His Highness. On our side the peace commissioners appear to be Count von Arenberg, Monsieur de Champagney and Councillor Richardot. It is thought that the meeting will take place here. This English commissioner is said to have left again for England on the 26th, and it is hoped that the English commissioners will be here by the end of next week. We received London letters of the 16th inst. this week stating that the commissioners are certain to come over, and are only awaiting the return of the emissary before definitely embarking. Nevertheless the Queen of England is still arming vigorously and equipping a large number of warships. It is also reported that in addition to soldiers 4500 sailors have been recruited. Drake is to put them on fifty or sixty war-vessels and sail to Spain with them, though his precise destination is unknown. A curious form of peace negotiation!  Moreover, the Queen of England has called up and inscribed the whole male population, and all her harbours along the coast are garrisoned and warships in the ports near Scotland and Ireland are ready for sea, so that the Spanish Armada cannot get into England. Altogether she is handling maritime affairs with great boldness.
    Letters from Lisbon of the 17th ult. reveal that many vessels from Hamburg have arrived there safely with all sorts of merchandise. Of the twenty ships from Brazil only fifteen have got in, as the remainder were captured by English pirates. As for the Armada of the King of Spain at Lisbon, nothing is said about when it will sail or where to, but, as the English in Spanish waters will be so strong, both fleets bound for India are in serious danger, and this may gradually ruin trade in Portugal and Spain.

292. The Turks continue to arm
                            Constantinople
                            February 15, 1588
    Ibrahim Pasha continues his preparations for putting to sea next May with two hundred galleys. All necessary orders for the purpose have been issued, especially those concerning the galley-slaves. But I have reliable information and have reported already that hardly more than forty galleys or fifty at the utmost will be able to leave. it is possible that Ibrahim pasha is not going himself and that he will have to entrust the guardianship of the Archipelago to somebody else, but he tells every one he is going and that he is absolutely determined to bring in the Maltese or Florentine galleys or die in the attempt. And this is to be merely the beginning of his campaigns, for the following year with three hundred galleys he is going to try something really great. However, this is not altogether believed. Anyway in that case the Maltese and Florentines would be unable to sail so far into the Sultan’s dominions, if they could not take shelter in Venetian harbours. I fancy the Turks will proceed to Candia first, and this naturally causes the Venetian ambassador here no small anxiety. Owing to Ibrahim Pasha’s campaign the Venetians will take countermeasures with seventy or eighty galleys and will assemble about two hundred well-armed vessels at Corfu.



293. The Turks continue to arm
                            Constantinople
                            March 15, 1588
                            background: The French Ambassador behaves ill
    As for the equipment of the galleys it is still being pushed on, but as regards Ibrahim Pasha it is thought that he will not be allowed away himself, or at any rate not farther than the Archipelago. I have been secretly informed that the Sultan has recently endeavoured to find out in confidence from his Hoja whether he was doing right in granting the request of Ibrahim Pasha for an expedition to Barbary. The Hoja gave as its opinion that the Sultan would be ill-advised at the present moment to entrust to so untried and inexperienced an Admiral such a large number of galleys for so important an undertaking. To guard the Archipelago it would suffice for the Sultan to send out under another Commander a few galleys in addition to the ordinary fleet, and to protect navigation from here to Alexandria and other Turkish places from the Christian pirates. This advice was acceptable to the Sultan, who was anyway unwilling to let Ibrahim Pasha depart. But it is still uncertain what decision the Sultan will make when further pressed by Ibrahim Pasha. In the meanwhile the Arsenal is hard at work and all necessary preparations are being made for forty or fifty galleys to put out. The English Embassy urges Ibrahim Pasha all day and every day to go himself, and the ambassador has given up the journey home through Poland which he was to have made by order of his Queen. They say he is to stay here another year. The Frenchman still continues his bestial behaviour, and is hated and cursed by every one he has to do with. He shouts and cheers, as I have already related, over the victory of his King, and declares that by this success he has freed his whole kingdom of Huguenots and heretics. I fear, however, that he is somewhat short of this. The French envoy says also that, so long as the English Queen has a representative here, the French King may as well spare himself a special ambassador, as the Englishman works hard to intrigue against and injure Christendom and especially the most venerable House of Austria. The French apparently have orders to the same effect. May God overthrow and utterly destroy both of them, and in particular those who, as one might well expect of them, allow themselves to be used for so shameful an end. All true-hearted Christians will desire this for them in order that they may not attain their most harmful and poisonous object.

294. Peace Negotiations must fail
                            Antwerp
                            April 2, 1588
    Little has been heard this week about war affairs or peace negotiations. Nevertheless it is believed that an arrangement has been arrived at to render real negotiations possible. The English commissioners, however, seem not to be very anxious for this unless the Duke of Parma makes up his mind to yield on the two points submitted by the commissioners to His Highness, that firstly all foreign troops of any kind whatsoever be dismissed from these countries, and secondly that freedom of conscience be granted there. Now, as His Highness on behalf of the King of Spain will not give way on these points, it is doubtless unnecessary to enter upon negotiations for peace.

295. More Peace Rumours
                            Antwerp
                            April 9, 1588
    Letters from London of the 25th inst. [sic] reached here this week. They recount that the Queen of England is making every preparation, since the Armada of the King of Spain proves to be so powerful and is apparently intended to attack England. Accordingly she has ordered ten thousand men to be recruited in London and provided with firearms and defensive weapons. The like is being done in all towns of the realm, to defend the country on the frontiers and in the harbours. The Queen is having many war-vessels equipped daily, and Captain Drake is said to be lying ready in the port of Plymouth with sixty warships. But we are not told whether he is to sail. We must therefore suppose that he will lie in this harbour to see if the Spanish Armada comes to England or not. Karl Taxis received letters this day of the 8th inst. from Bruges, relating that on the evening of the 7th His Highness arrived safely at Bruges with the English doctor, and that His Highness will wait there for all the other English commissioners from Ostend. It is thought certain that they will come there to congratulate His Highness and to determine whether they are to proceed to Ghent or Antwerp to negotiate peace.

296. Jollity at the Hague
                            Antwerp
                            April 23, 1588
    I wrote from Middelburg on the 14th inst., informing you that the Hollanders and Zeelanders were sending some of their emissaries to join the commissioners of the Queen of England at Ostend. There are eight of them. As I was leaving Middelburg by boat at midday on the 16th inst., these emissaries were already there, travelling to Ostend. On the boat by which I sailed were several people from Holland, who told me that last Palm Sunday, the 10th inst., there was great gladness and rejoicing at the Hague in Holland among the nobility and notables because the English governor at Bergen-op-Zoom in the name of the Queen of England has settled all questions touching Holland in peace and amity. Count Maurice of Nassau gave a banquet and the Lord above mentioned gave a brilliant feast at which joy and high spirits were supreme. Count von Holloch at this banquet tried for a jest to bend his rapier into a hoop right round his body, but it broke and wounded his arm in two places. All questions in Holland are settled and the entire country is under the protection of the Queen of England. On the 21st inst. the English commissioners and the Prince of Parma welcomed each other with much pomp, embraced and exchanged compliments in the open field and beneath the blue sky at Oudenburg between Ostend and Bruges. On this spot the discussion of peace is to take place. Many tents have been pitched there, and to-morrow the Prince of Parma is having a magnificent banquet prepared for which eight cooks have been sent over from here. The Prince of Parma has sent the commissioners vehicles laden with all sorts of delicacies, such as pasties, game, fresh fish, Rhenish wine and other things unprocurable on the sea coast and hereabouts. When this welcoming and banqueting is over we shall learn whether the peace negotiations make any further progress or not. A good result is hoped for here. May the Almighty grant it!  It is high time!
    Up till now the English commissioners have been negotiating with the prince of Parma about hostages. The Prince tried to propose to them for the purpose Count Egmont, Monsieur de la Motte, and Messieurs Champagney and Richardot, but the Englishmen refused, since they require people of equal rank with themselves. However, they announce themselves content with the old Count von Mansfeld, the Duke of Aerschote, the Count von Arenberg, and Monsieur Montigny.
    Charles, Count von Arenberg, 1550-1616. He was entrusted with diplomatic missions under Don John of Austria, took part in the siege of Antwerp under Alexander Farnese, and, during the period of the expedition projected against England by Philip II in which Alexander Farnese had important employment, was chosen to act as Governor of the Netherlands. He participated subsequently in the peace negotiations between the Low Countries, Spain and England. He is alleged to have been implicated in the conspiracy of Cobham and Raleigh against James VI.
    François de la Grange de Montigny, Marshal of France, 1556-1617, fought against the Spaniards in the army of Henry IV, was in command of the light cavalry, and Governor of Metz and Verdun.
Peter Ernest, Count, later Prince, von Mansfeld, 1517-1604, Spanish General in the Netherlands and Captain General of Luxemburg. He fought first against the Huguenots, then against the rebels in the Netherlands, of which he was repeatedly Captain General. After the death of Farnese he was Captain General till the arrival of Archduke Ernest, and was made Prince in 1594.

297. Municipal Food Control
                            Antwerp 
                            May 7, 1588
                            background: See Fugger News-Letter (First Series), Letter 84, The Armada ready for Sea.
    A week ago the talk amongst other things was of a banquet which passed off amid much rejoicing. But there is here much food for thought, as the English commissioners have now been in the country six weeks without our hearing with any definiteness whatever whether any matters have been discussed or arranged or decided at all. Some think this a good sign, others the contrary. May the Almighty grant that peace ensue!
    The report comes here from England that the whole country there is alert and expectant of war, because of the great war Armada which is to come from Spain. In France a harbour is stated to have been assigned to the fleet which put out from Lisbon on march 25. All provisions are now at quite reasonable prices, but corn grows cheaper daily as the city has taken over great quantities from the dealers and the ordinary man has no money. At noon to-day they were saying on Change that the Queen of England wishes to have the towns of Calais and Boulogne again. The King of Spain is to fight the French for them.
    

298. The Prince of Parma and the English Commissioners
                            Antwerp
                            May 21, 1588
    There is little good news to report about the negotiations for peace, as the Queen of England through her commissioners insists on the removal from these countries of all foreign soldiery after the conclusion of peace, Spaniards, Italians and Germans, and on freedom being granted to the Reformed religion in Holland and Zeeland. The Prince of Parma, because of His Sacred Majesty the King of Spain, will not and cannot grant this. Yesterday evening some Italians on business with the Court of Parma reported here that the Prince of Parma had caused the English commissioner with whom he had for some days been negotiating peace to be removed from Bruges. He had him informed that he should tell the other commissioners that if they had no further orders from their Queen they might as well go home. On hearing this the English commissioners have arrived at Ostend. Nevertheless it is said that the Prince of Parma has sent an express despatch to Spain and expects an answer back in twenty days. In the meanwhile the English are to stay at Ostend.

299. A Far Cry from Constantinople
                            Constantinople
                            May 27, 1588
    The English embassy is still here. It was ready to start a year of two ago and confidently hoped to accompany Ibrahim Pasha’s fleet against the King of Spain as far as Gallipoli and then to journey home through Adrianople and Poland. I gather that its journey will not be begun till next month, and even then with but little satisfaction. From a person of confidence, who is in close relationship with the English embassy, I hear that it has given up its journey, because Polish affairs are still doubtful and the passage through Poland remains unsafe. They look forward also to the arrival of an important Polish embassy here and in England, so that they could then make the journey with a small retinue.
    The English ambassador is ready to go home from here through Danzig, and leaves his secretary behind till the arrival of a fresh embassy.

300. English Trade in the Elbe
                            Hamburg
                            June 13, 1588
    To-day comes news that the English have arrived on the Elbe with over thirty ships. But they have anchored at Freiburg, a large village on the Holstein side twelve miles from here. It seems as though they wished to ascertain what arrangement they can make with Hamburg before approaching nearer. Before closing this letter I happen to meet one of the eight chamberlains, who informs me of the circumstances regarding these English vessels. There are twenty-nine merchantmen and seven warships. The Admiral had orders from the Queen to suggest to the Hamburgers that they should permit the unloading of these ships at Staden, and if they would not do this in friendship and of good will then he was to carry it through by force and stake his existence upon it. The Queen would then attack the Hamburgers by land and water wherever and however she could get at them. The Queen writes herself to the authorities, and the despatch has this day been read out to the Council. She insists on the vessels remaining this time at Staden. If the Hamburgers could subsequently arrange with the English to grant them the same privileges as the inhabitants of Staden, she would, if the latter do not object, make no difficulties. But the city of Hamburg will suffer, and it must again leave all its ships at home. This is really a very high-handed action on the part of the English in a river belonging to the Empire.

301. Hans Limburger sees the Armada at Sea
                            Hamburg
                            July 2, 1588
    I simply must tell you that the skipper, Hans Limburger, has arrived here with his vessel from Cadiz. He broke through the embargo, and has a cargo of salt, wine, raisins, cinnamon, and a little sugar. He put out from there on the 20th ult., O.S., and passed Lisbon on the 24th. In the distance he saw the Spanish Armada and sailed abreast of it all day. The next day it was blowing rather hard and he could not see it. He is of opinion that the Armada put out on the 23rd of May Old Style or the 2nd of June New Style and was shaping a course for the Channel. The skipper met an English warship on his way and this brought him into Plymouth, to Drake’s Armada. He was entertained by Drake for three days and the English were rejoicing that the Spanish Armada was at sea. Afterwards Captain Drake gave the skipper a permit, so that he might be allowed to pass, and quickly formed in order and put to sea in spite of a contrary wind. If an action is fought, there will be terrible loss of life. On two consecutive days here the sun and moon have been quite bloody. What this signifies the merciful God alone knows. May de defend the Right!
                    Postscript.
    Letters have just come from Cologne reporting that the Prince of Parma has news that the Armada sailed from Lisbon on the 30th May. God grant it all prosperity!

302. The Pope is in alliance with Spain
                            Rome
                            June 25, 1588
                            background: See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 85, Excommunication of Elizabeth.
    The Pope recently signified to one of the Cardinals that he was in alliance with the King of Spain. He intended to grant him a million crowns in aid, so soon as news reached him that the Spanish Armada had disembarked its men in England.

303. Impressment of Foreign Sailors
                            Constantinople
                            June 29, 1588
    The Moldavians and Wallachians brought in their annual tribute lately; likewise the Ragusans. The last mentioned were for a while in great danger and anxiety because of the English embassy. It accused the Ragusans in writing to the Sultan through his Hoja and the Grand Vizier of being disloyal subjects of the Sultan and traitors to their master. For they had sent over sixty large ships with their crews to help the King of Spain against the Queen of England. The English embassy demanded punishment for this and a stern order for the recall of the ships and ships’ companies. The Ragusans had the greatest difficulty in excusing themselves to the Sultan Ibrahim and the Hoja and in exculpating themselves on the ground that these ships had been detained not deliberately but, as is customary among Christian potentates, forcibly, and to the detriment of those concerned and contrary to their desire. In the King’s Armada there are thus many Venetian, French and other foreign vessels which have been detained and used.
    The above-mentioned English embassy is still ready to start from here to Poland, and has depicted the majesty and power of their Queen to the natives in such a manner that the great men here and the common people as well do not know how to praise this Queen at all in proportion to her merits. They say that the English lack nothing to make the sound Mussulmans, and need only stretch out a finger to become one with the Turks in outward appearance, in religious observance and in their whole character.
    The longer the French man is here the more he is disliked in the place. At the moment all the Viziers are against him, and only the Sultan’s Hoja is keeping the church at San Francisco closed to oblige him.

304. Rumoured Defeat of the Armada
                            Antwerp
                            July 2, 1588
    This afternoon news came from Bruges that His Highness the Prince of Parma has received information from Calais that the Spanish and English Armadas have met on the English coast and the Spanish Armada has been beaten. No details are reported.

305. The Armada has joined the Prince of Parma
                            Rome
                            July 9, 1588.
    A courier from Turin brings news that they have heard there from Spain that the Spanish Armada has embarked six thousand sappers from Galicia and Biscay. The Spaniards here state that the fleet passed the English Channel on the 6th of July and is said to have joined the ships and army of the Prince of Parma.

306. Perhaps the Armada will not sail
                            Antwerp
                            July 11, 1588.
    Letters from England of the 28th ult. have announced that the Queen of England’s fleet put out under Captain Drake one hundred and forty sail strong, as it had been learnt that the Spanish Armada had also sailed and had been seen at sea. But in London letters of the 4th inst. this does not appear. It is thought that the Spanish Armada is near Lisbon. Therefore the Queen has commanded the Admiral, who is in port at Boulogne, not to put out with the fleet but to await further orders. From this some conclude there will be peace in the Netherlands. From Morocco it is reported that the King there has a strong force in the field to help the Turks in their siege of the fortress of Oran. If this should be the case it would ill suit Spain and there would be grave doubts about the sailing of the Armada.
    Besides this we hear from England that Martin Schenk is still there asking for money. He hopes to get some.

307. The Armada has been destroyed in a Storm
                            Middelburg
                            July 22, 1588
    Five ships from Lisbon have reached Calais bringing salt and spices. I got this news after closing my last letter, and the rumour was then circulating that these ships had brought tidings that the Armada of the King of Spain had been utterly destroyed and annihilated. These ships would seem to have met a portion of the Armada which had got back to Lisbon. But, as the news reached here so quickly and unexpectedly, little credence was placed in it, and I did not care to write anything to you about it. Since then, however, the English mail has come in bringing many letters, and in them it is stated that a vessel has arrived from Lisbon announcing that it twice met ships of the King’s Armada. The first time twelve, the second time seventeen very badly mauled. And when this vessel asked the Spaniards what had become of the rest of the Armada, it received the answer that they did not know, as they had parted company in a storm. The storm had come on so quickly and so unexpectedly that they had had no time to anchor. But what really happened is unknown. The storm seems not to have lasted more than an hour.
    Drake and the Admiral of England are still at sea; how they have fared we know not, but we hope to hear from them soon, as the wind from England is favourable now. This news only reached here yesterday and more is eagerly awaited. Some suppose that Drake too was in this storm.

308. It has sailed home because of Plague
                            Prague
                            July 26, 1588
    It is rumoured here that the Spanish Armada has sailed back to Lisbon because plague has broken out on board. The English are said to have sailed after them. But where this news comes from I cannot find out.

309. Anxiety to hear of the Success of the Armada
                            Constantinople
                            July 28, 1588
    Despatches arrived here recently from the Queen of England touching the recall of her embassy, and they were delivered to all Viziers a week ago. At present it is supposed that this embassy will not be allowed to depart before there is some definite news about the Spanish Armada and its accomplishments. People here are inclined to wonder what the Sultan thinks about the new friendship with this Queen and about her offers. It is to be hoped that the will of God is no other than that justice should take its course, and that she should meet the fate she deserves from the King of Spain when his plan has succeeded. We are waiting for this here every day. The embassy is ready to start and proposes to go home from here through Poland and by Danzig. The English embassy received the required permission through the Hoja of the Sultan, and, as is customary, took leave of the Sultan on the 24th inst. From now on it may, as announced, start for Danzig through Poland any day.
    On the 25th inst. the French ambassador despatched his cousin to France with all speed, no doubt on account of the news which had come about occurrences in Paris between the King and the Guises. There is much talk here on the subject, and it is asserted that the Guise is already virtually King of France and the other is totally deprived of power.
    This may mean May 11, 1588, the so-called Day of Barricades, on which the heads of the League stirred up a rising in Paris against King Henry III, in such a way as apparently to increase the power of the League to an immense extent.

310. Peace Negotiations continue slowly
                            Antwerp
                            July 30, 1588
    As for the peace negotiations, a kind friend who is attending them writes to me that the English commissioners have despatched their Dr. Dale to the Duke of parma at Bruges, to report on them. This Doctor was very well received, and on the 18th inst. very courteously sent on to Bornhem. He was, moreover, presented by His Highness with a very fine and magnificently caparisoned horse. Now, when this Doctor had again reached Bornhem, the English despatched one of their number to England to furnish a report on their deliberations to the Queen and to obtain her approval. Her decision is now awaited. In the meanwhile the commissioners of both sides meet, but negotiations are suspended.

311. The Pope must raise Money for Spain
                            Rome
                            July 30, 1588
    The Council of the Roman people assembled on Tuesday and debated how to raise the money to enable the Pope to meet his engagement to make a contribution to the King of Spain for his expedition against England.

312. Hans Buttber’s Account of the Armada
                            Hamburg
                            August 4, 1588
    Hans Buttber has arrived off the town in a big ship. He comes through the Channel from San Lucar. He was with Captain Drake for four or five days and joined the Englishman on the 21st, O.S., of last month, just after the latter had had an engagement with the Spanish Armada. From the 21st to the 26th they had skirmished and fired heavily at each other, but they could not board, and the English with their little ships sailed so well and manœuvred so skilfully, firing meanwhile, that the galleasses could not get at them. Drake captured Don Pedro de Valdez, Admiral of fourteen vessels, and had him and ten other nobles brought on to his own ship. He gave them a banquet and treated them very handsomely and entertained them besides with trumpets and music. On this ship he took sixty guns and made four hundred and fifty men prisoners. Moreover, he got yet another ship which caught fire of itself. All this happened in presence of the skipper. On the 26th he received a pass, but only on condition of carrying a letter to another English port. There 28 Queen’s ships were lying. As soon as their Admiral read the document he got ready for sea to join Drake, but sent two yachts to Holland and Zeeland to tell them to keep a sharp look-out there and prevent the Dunkirk people from coming out.
    This noon there comes from Holland a vessel which was at Enkhuizen actually on the last day of July. It brings news that eighteen ships of the Spanish Armada were sunk by gunfire, and eight taken and brought to England. The rest of the Spanish Armada has fled to the French coast. If this is true it will somewhat abate Spanish insolence and give the English fresh courage, though they have no lack of insolence either.

313. Armada beaten, English in pursuit
                            Hamburg
                            August 5, 1588
    It is reported that the English Armada has beaten the Spanish and taken twenty-two ships and sunk eighteen by gunfire. Many vessels have been burnt. Some two hundred Counts, or Dons as they call them, together with the young Santa Cruz, have been taken prisoners to England. Moreover, the Admiral and Vice-Admiral with two other large ships, each of almost six hundred tons, have been brought in to Zeeland. Two galleasses seem to have been destroyed, the remainder are still at sea.
    At Dunkirk a great dispute over the Armada has arisen between the Marquis de Renti, Governor of Hainault and Admiral-at-sea, and an Italian Marquis. They quarrelled so furiously that the Italian called Renti a traitor. So they had recourse to their weapons, and the Marquis received four bad wounds and the Italian is gravely injured and will hardly escape with his life. Captain Drake seems also to have been shot and badly injured. The English are pursuing the remains of the Spanish Armada. The Duke of Parma was unable to get out of Dunkirk with his fleet, and cut down four or five Captains with his own hand because they would not support him at the right moment. The upshot is that the activities of the Holy League are greatly limited and the English will do great damage at sea by rapine and theft. God dispose all for the best!

314. The Armada back at Corunna. No great damage
                            Venice
                            August 12, 1588
    Letters from Spain and Madrid of the 20th ult. report that all the ships of the Spanish Armada which had been dispersed by gales at sea returned to Corunna on the 13th ult. without having suffered any particular damage, but some vessels which, owing to storms, had to go as far as England were pillaged by fisher-boats. A very malignant sickness prevails on the Armada. So the General, Duke Medina Sidonia, is disembarking the sick and replacing them with healthy men. Consequently there has been a great concourse of people from all directions, as the intention is to renew the expedition against England as soon as possible.

315. Wholesale Destruction in the North Sea
                            Middelburg
                            August 12, 1588
    The Spanish Armada so long talked about has now at last appeared, but seemingly to its undoing. Firstly, on the 5th inst. a despatch pinnace arrived from England with orders that the Zeelanders and Hollanders should keep themselves in readiness on all coasts and particularly not let the Duke of Parma and his Armada get out of Dunkirk. The English meant to do their best against the Spanish Armada. This pinnace also brought the report that the Armada had been seen off the English coast and that it intended to invade England in force. At that time the English Armada was assembled in one place, and the Spaniards could not sail in because the English always had the wind in their favour, and the Spaniards perpetually got the powder smoke from the English ships in their eyes. On the 6th inst. came two more pinnaces from England with orders to keep firm hold of the Prince of Parma and his fleet. They also brought news that twenty-two Spanish ships had been sunk, and the Vice-Admiral, together with all the distinguished nobles who had taken refuge from other ships, had been brought to England. So they have driven the Spanish Armada between Dover and Calais and in the meanwhile examined the Vice-Admiral. He is said to have admitted that the object was England. The intention was to get as far as Dover and Calais and occupy the English there, while the Prince of Parma was to have invaded England at some other point. He was supposed to be supporting the Spaniards with his force of 70,000 men. On the 11th inst. another pinnace came from England with orders that the Prince of Parma was on no account to be let out and all ships ready for sea were to be sent to England. The pinnace also reported that both fleets had fought bravely for eight hours between Dover and Calais and that at the end the English had given chase to ten Spanish ships. Of these some were driven ashore and promptly wrecked, but most of them were brought to England. So, having fared thus badly, the majority of the Spanish Armada assembled in the Straits of Dover and hoped for aid from the Prince of Parma. On the 10th inst. the English again attacked the Spaniards afresh with all their forces and damaged them severely. The Spaniards were obliged to flee into the North Sea, but the English continued their pursuit. This night the Prince of Parma tried to put out from Dunkirk, as the Spanish Armada had been seen to flee from there. Four large well-found ships came out first, but, bless your heart, our ships played with them as a cat with a mouse, caught them at once and sank all four. The Spanish ships are lying up and down the coast like birds without wings. The English fire without intermission and shoot away sails, masts, stays and all rigging off the ships, so that they are unmanageable. Whenever they drive the Spanish ships ashore they are lost. On the 11th inst. our boats’ crews got two big ships, one called the San Philippo of more than 1200 tons, the other the San Matheo of the same size, both galliots. The one they got off Blankenberghe, the other near Dunkirk. Off one ship most of the nobles seem to have escaped to Nieuport, not far from Dunkirk. Our men hope to get hold of more of these ships. The sea is driving ashore near Flushing much artillery and wreckage from the burnt ships as well as burnt corpses, so that it is a horrible sight. In Flushing there are heaps of captured Spaniards. They say the Prince of Parma has betrayed them, for the Spanish Armada went thus far up the country relying on his promises, and hoping to receive great assistance from him. Indeed they were of opinion that he would accomplish more than the Armada, for he had always promised them to come out with 500 sail and be a match for the English alone. He was going to make the invasion with 70,000 men, but now he is bringing woe and misery on all the splendid Spanish ships. They curse him horribly, and it is to be feared he will fall into complete disfavour with the King and be recalled from the Netherlands. Altogether the wretched devils here do nothing but complain. Our sailors wanted to kill all the Spaniards because they would not surrender. Their ships are built as high as churches. But we took pity upon them. The seamen who brought in the ships above mentioned numbered 150 in all. They marched through the town at noon in procession two abreast with all the Spaniards’ best clothes on. In costume one looked like a Portuguese, another like a Spaniard, a third like a Biscayan, a fourth like an Italian. People here thought they were prisoners from the Armada, because of the many expensive costumes. In the two ships there was plenty of booty, about 120 brass guns, many of iron and a quantity of provisions.
    A vessel has also arrived at Flushing from Calais with the report that Duke Medina Sidonia and de San Lucar, in command of the Spanish Armada, has been brought in there. Half his head seems to have been shot off. They say he was the most powerful man in all Spain. The Spanish Armada has had a terrible time of it. A Scotchman has come in here also. He saw the Spanish Armada in the distance on the North Sea and says it is barely over 80 vessels strong and the English are after it with 250 and firing heavily with a favourable wind. The Spaniards have had no rest day or night for sixteen to eighteen days.
    We shall hear more yet. So much has happened in the last for weeks that very little has been said about trade. At every place in the country men have been standing to arms in case they should be wanted. It is hoped the Prince of Parma will at length be wearied out, although the commissioners are still sitting so that one might expect some very wonderful result. I leave it at that. Time will perhaps bring more strange events, and the war may move to yet other places. The English will not quiet down all at once, for they now have 500 to 600 well-found ships at disposal and might do wonders with them. Perhaps they will pay a visit to Spain and Portugal, as these two countries are very bare of ships and guns. The Spanish Armada brought with it many galleys too, among them two quite big ones from Italy. They had hoped to get them over here, but they hung in the sea and were swamped. So with them also the Spaniards had no luck. Many things have occurred also that I do not know about. The English actually lost three or four large ships. The biggest, the Elizabeth, was burnt in the fight, and it is said that with all these fires the sea was as bright and clear by night as by day. The glare could be plainly seen from the land here, along the coast where the wrecked ships and dead men lie driven hither by the wind. It would be well were God’s will done and an end made, but I fear that the war will go on still longer.

316. The Pope regrets the Armada is back at Corunna
                            Rome
                            August 13, 1588
    Last Sunday the Spanish ambassador in residence here informed the Pope that owing to storms at sea the Spanish Armada had reassembled and on the 16th ult. was still lying in the harbour of Corunna. It has lost eleven vessels, large and small, and this the Pope was evidently very sorry to hear.

317. Prizes in English Harbours
                            London
                            August 14, 1588
    Twelve ships of the Spanish Armada have been brought to Plymouth; among them is the ship of the Vice-Admiral.. In the Thames water, which flows from the sea towards London, lie another twenty captured ships. Others also have been carried into different harbours in England, among them four more of the largest ships, so that altogether 36 ships have been brought to this country.

318. Philip II’s Gout is much worse
                            Venice
                            August 19, 1588
    The fault for the Spanish Armada having suffered damage in a storm at sea lies at the door of General Medina Sidonia. He withdrew into the port of Corunna with only four ships, and issued orders for the return of the pinnaces and other vessels. But we learn subsequently by letters from Spain of the 30th ult. that this Armada turned again towards England on the 23rd July. Although His Majesty of Spain was already suffering greatly from gout, his pains redoubled when he heard news how greatly the Spanish Armada had suffered in the storm and how it was somewhat hindered in its operations.

319. No Papal Favours till the Armada succeeds
                            Rome
                            August 20, 1588
                            background: Eduardo Farnese was a son of Alexander I Farnese, Duke of Parma, 1564-1592. Eduardo was made Cardinal in 1591, and died 1626.
    The Pope has signified that Don Eduardo Farnese, whose elevation to the Cardinalate is so strongly urged by the King of Spain, shall be made a Cardinal so soon as the Pope receives news that the Spanish Armada has landed troops in England.

320. No Audiences at the Escorial
                            Venice
                            August 23, 1588
    The Spaniards have received letters from Madrid of the 28th ult. and announce that His Majesty of Spain is at the Escorial, and is giving no audiences, as is His Majesty’s custom when he has important matters to consider.

321. Rome hears the Armada has beaten the English
                            Rome
                            August 27, 1588
                            background: John Francis Morosini, Cardinal and Bishop of Brescia, Papal Legate in France, 1537-1596.
    Last Monday a printed sheet was published here, describing how the English fleet was beaten by the Spaniards. This is confirmed by a messenger from the Duke of Savoy also, and Cardinal Morosini writes to the same effect. But the Pope and some Cardinals are still doubtful, and the Pope has said that he will not hand over the promised million to the King of Spain and make Eduard Farnese a Cardinal until the Spanish Armada has disembarked troops in England.

322. Prague rejoices over the Success of the Armada
                            Prague
                            August 30, 1588
    Yesterday evening a messenger came here from Milan with the announcement that the Spanish Armada has fought the English and the English have succumbed. At this the rejoicing here is universal. But whether it is correct we shall not know for certain till the regular mail comes.

323. The Armada in the North of England
                            Antwerp
                            September 3, 1588
    We had letters this evening from London in England dated the 28th ult. with the report that the Spanish Armada is at an island in the North of England. The King of Scots has forbidden delivery to the Spaniards of food or munitions on pain of death. Captain Drake is said to be despatching 180 sail to pursue the Spanish Armada.

324. Prague gives details of the Spanish Victory
                            Prague
                            September 8, 1588
    We have received a special messenger with news that the English and Spanish Armadas have met and the English tried to escape to land, but Duke Medina, Spanish General in command, stopped this. He attacked and defeated the English and took 60 vessels small and large. Among them was the English Admiral. The remainder of the English ships together with Drake escaped. Duke Medina sailed into the port of Plymouth, where he landed 8000 soldiers and 30 large guns. Then he went to join the Prince of Parma, and in company with him will try his luck in England further.

325. Liberation of Mohammedan Prisoners by France
                            Lyons
                            September 11, 1588
    A hundred Turks and Moors who had been at the oars in a Spanish galleass were here recently. Our King had caused them to be brought here with an archer from Calais at his own expense and sent them from here to Marseilles by water. From there they sail at the King’s expense to Constantinople. The King had sent a request to the Grand Turk to liberate the same number of Christian captives in return. So the French King has more compassion on the Turks than on the Spaniards.

326. Illusory Peace Negotiations
unknown
unknown
                    background: Extract from the negotiations held at Bruges, sent to Spain before the departure of the two Armadas.
Demands made by the envoys of the Queen of England.
    1. She wishes to be informed how far the King of Spain has given the Prince of
         Parma full authority to act.
    Answer:  This will be seen to.
    2. The Queen requires that all arms be laid down and that an armistice ensue.
    Answer:  It has been said often enough that this cannot be done.
    3. All treaties between the Crowns of Spain and England will be renewed and
         thereby all fortresses and cities will be returned to their former owners.
    Answer:  If peace results this will be done.
    4. All foreign troops must leave the country.
    Answer:  His Majesty cannot do this, as all his neighbours are armed.
    5. England demands free trade.
    Answer:  This point offers no difficulties, since Spain sincerely desires peace.
    6. The Queen requires that the alliance which she formerly had with the Kingdom
         of Portugal should remain in force.
    Answer:  His Sacred Majesty is not less favourably disposed to the Queen of 
           England than His Majesty’s predecessors, and desires to maintain peace
           and concord with England.
    7. The Queen demands freedom of religion and conscience.
    Answer:  The King does not consider that the Queen has the right to issue orders 
            to him within his own territories any more or any less than the King has
            the right to command her in her dominions.
    8. The Inquisition is not to be set up within these countries.
    Answer:  His Majesty does not intend this to be done nor does he desire it for the
            future.
    9. The Queen requires that all Governors be natives of these countries.
    Answer:  The King cannot be forbidden to place in office whom he will.
    10. All money expended upon this war must be made good.
    Answer:  The King says that these debts have not been incurred at his desire, and
            that His Majesty has far better right to require that the money and
            expenses caused him by this war be repaid to him.
    11. The Queen is ready to return to the King all fortresses and districts which she
           has occupied.
    Answer:  This would be no more than honest, as His Majesty has been illegally
            deprived of them.
    12. The Queen is ready to help the King with all her forces to recover his land.
    Answer:  More detailed explanation is required as to what this signifies and by 
           what means the Queen proposes to do this.
    13. The Queen desires to know what security is to be given her that this treaty 
           will be observed.
    Answer:  No other security can be given to the Queen than the signatures of the
           King and of His Highness the Duke of Parma. The same has been given
           to other Provinces and towns and they have been satisfied.

327. Lack of Powder prevents Pursuit
                            Staden
                            September 22, 1588
We recently informed you that the Spanish Armada had invaded Scotland. This was incorrect. They did indeed land in order to procure fresh water and then sailed back to Lisbon. From lack of powder and munitions the English were unable to pursue the Spaniards further, but sailed back to England. Else they would have been able to do the Spanish Armada much harm, because the wind was foul for it. About the losses of the two fleets nothing is yet known. It is thought certain that the Admiral with Drake as Vice-Admiral and 80 of the largest and best ships will sail to Lisbon and Spain in order to intercept the remainder of the Armada before it gets home. But they might have their trip for nothing. Some Jesuits and women found among the Armada prisoners have been hanged in London. In addition they were hanged an Englishman sent as a spy by the Prince of Parma. We are also told that there is an old gentlemen of 84 among the prisoners. He was apparently among those sent by the Prince of Parma to negotiate peace, and is said to have written to the Queen not to fit out a navy for fear of endangering the peace. He is imprisoned as a traitor, but what will be done with him is unknown. Several more such people may be found yet.

328. Philip sick of a Fever
                            Venice
                            September 24, 1588
    Spanish letters from Madrid of the 3rd inst. announce that the King is sick of a fever at the Escorial. His Majesty has not appeared in public for some days, having received news that his Armada has been rather badly mauled by the English and by heavy winds.

329. Leicester dead. Drake comes home
                            Middelburg
                            September 29, 1588
                            background: Sir James Croft (d. 1591) was imprisoned for treason under Mary, released on her accession by Elizabeth, suspected of intrigue with Mary of Guise in 1560, made a Privy Councillor in 1570, was one of the commissioners in the trial of Mary Queen of Scots, and in 1588 was sent to arrange peace with the Duke of Parma. For his treachery on this occasion he was sent to the Tower.
    The latest English letters of the 17th inst. report that an English skipper has come in to say for certain that the Spanish Armada has sailed with a favourable wind round Ireland to Spain. There seem to have been from 60 to 70 vessels. On the journey home crews and ships may have suffered further loss. This we shall perhaps hear in the next letters from Lisbon.
    This letter from London reports also that the Earl of Leicester has died two days’ journey away from London. He was on a trip to a watering place presumably for the improvement of his health. The Queen of England is greatly distressed at his death.
    James Croft, one of the English peace commissioners in the Netherlands, has been imprisoned in London. He has admitted having assented to certain proposals with the Prince of Parma without the previous knowledge of his colleagues, notably to handing over Flushing and Briel. The English have stopped 15 or 16 vessels trying to sail from Lisbon to Hamburg.
    A fresh letter just from London brings news that Captain Drake with his entire fleet has returned to England, being unable to stay at sea any longer because of the gales. He is disembarking his crews and paying them off.

330. Constantinople still incredulous
                            Constantinople
                            October 7, 1588.
                            background: Maximilian III, Archduke of Austria, son of the Emperor Maximilian II, 1558-1620. In 1587 he was elected King of Poland, but in the battle of Bitschin he lost his crown to the rival king, Sigismund of Sweden. During the engagement he was taken prisoner, but liberated in 1588 on renunciation of the throne. He subsequently fought with success against the Turks and ruled Alsace for a period. On the death of Rudolph II he renounced the Imperial Crown in favour of Archduke Ferdinand, who afterwards became Emperor Ferdinand II.
    People here and the Sultan quite especially are greatly irritated at the absence of the grand Polish embassy which they have so long been looking forward to. Also from the reports of the merchants who come here daily they are strongly of the opinion that the Poles have proved false and treacherous to the Turks and have a secret understanding with the Emperor and other Christian potentates to do people here all possible harm when opportunity offers. But most of all it is believed that they intend to accept Archduke Maximilian as King. When the Beglerbey of Greece returned home recently from a visit to the Sultan, he spoke of the Poles with great anger and disgust, called them lying hounds and threatened that for their treachery to him, the Beglerbey, they should be punished as they deserved. Immediately afterwards several agents were sent to Transylvania, Moldavia and Wallachia to learn about the movements of the Poles. As far as can be learnt from a secret and reliable source this has all been brought about by the Englishman, who visits all Viziers and dignitaries in person, and tells them that the navy of his Queen has defeated the Spanish Armada, captured most of it and killed the Spaniards. On the top of this lie he tells yet another. Assembled with His Majesty at Prague he declares are now almost all the chief Christian potentates, but in particular grand embassies from His Holiness the Pope, the King of Spain, the Muscovite, and the Poles, as well as all the Austrian Archdukes, in order to make Archduke Maximilian King of Poland and also to form a powerful alliance against all their foes, but against the Porte here in particular. The French and Venetian ambassadors are said to have declared that they know nothing definite about the Armada. But it is reported that news has already been received here in print assigning the victory to the Spanish Armada. But it is added that no decisive battle has taken place. This is expected every day.

331. Spanish Wrecks in Ireland
                            Antwerp
                            October 22, 1588
                            background: See Fugger News-Letter (First Series), Letter 92, End of the Armada.
    Several letters arrived here from London by Zeeland on the 17th inst., announcing that of the 80 ships of the Spanish Armada still remaining 34 of the biggest were driven ashore in Ireland by bad weather and a south-westerly gale. Where the rest have escaped to is not yet known. So when these vessels anchored on the Irish coast in a miserable state without masts and rudders, the gentlemen on board sent a boat to the Governor of Ireland to beg him to allow them on land to recover and to purchase necessities and also to repair their badly damaged vessels. This was granted, and the gentlemen with many of their men stayed ashore for some days and passed to and fro to their ships. They even presumed to throw up an entrenchment along the sea. But as soon as this was bruited abroad the people flew to arms and slaughtered all the Spaniards they could catch on land. However the most important were kept prisoners, and fourteen grandees, among them the Duke of Medina Sidonia, were hourly expected in London as captives. They overpowered the vessels and took or threw into the sea all on board. It is said, though, that the Duke of Medina Sidonia is not among these, but has escaped to Spain. The Queen has despatched Captain Norris to Zeeland with 4000 men.

332. Rome ceases to pray for Success this year
                            Rome
                            October 29, 1588
    In St. James’s Church here the Spanish Nation held intercession for the success of the Spanish Armada day and night for forty hours, but stopped last week, because, as the Spaniards assert, great numbers of this Armada have arrived at Biscay and sailed on to Lisbon. So this time evidently the Spaniards have had no success against England. Nevertheless they have learnt all about this dangerous voyage and have tested the defence of the English, so that next year on their return they will know better what to do and how to carry out their designs upon England.

333. Philip II refuses to see Medina Sidonia
                            Antwerp
                            November 5, 1588
                            background: See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 93, Mourning prohibited in Spain.
    This evening we received letters from Spain of the 5th ult. They are said to state that Duke Medina Sidonia arrived with 40-50 vessels at Corunna in Galicia, and wanted to go to Court at once and see His Majesty. But he was forbidden, and ordered to go home, as His Majesty had no desire to speak to him. Whether more vessels have reached other ports is not mentioned.

334. Don Antonio in England
                            Middelburg
                            November 10, 1588
    King Don Antonio is in England and hopes that on his petition something will be done for him next spring. His youngest son has been sent to the King of Barbary as hostage or surety. This King is to assist Don Antonio with 300,000 ducats. The same assistance is to be afforded him by England, and many freebooters are said to have offered him their services already. So in the summer an expedition of some sort may be made against Portugal.

335. An alleged Traitor
                            Venice
                            November 15, 1588
    They write from Naples that the Master of the Spanish Ordnance has been condemned to be torn asunder by four galleys for sending a boat full of powder and other munitions to the Queen of England on pretext of forwarding it to Spain.

336. A Plot at Lisbon
                            Antwerp
                            November 19, 1588
    Letters from Lisbon of the 10th ult. state that some important persons in league with Don Antonio have been imprisoned and executed.

337. Marine Stores from the Baltic declared Contraband of War by the Queen
                            Antwerp
                            November 19, 1588
    The Queen of England is busy fitting out 200 ships to pay a visit to Portugal. Captain Drake and certain other English gentlemen are at sea with 40 ships. Don Antonio, the exiled King of Portugal, is getting ready in Barbary with 100 ships which the King of Barbary is furnishing for the aid of the Queen of England.
    Yesterday letters of the 28th ult., N.S., reached here from London from the Alderman of the Stalhof there, Zimmermann by name, addressed to such of the Baltic merchants as are here present to inform them that by command of the Queen from next year, 1589, onwards no things serviceable for the equipment of ships such as wood, tow, pitch, tar, flax, hemp, cordage, anchors and so on may be exported from the Baltic to Spain. Failing observance she will know what to do with the ships.

338. Philip wants Calais as a Base for next year
                            Venice
                            November 25, 1588
    The Spaniards here state that the King is summoning to Spain the Prince of Parma from the Netherlands and Prince Doria from Italy, in order to consult with t6hem about the prosecution next year of the expedition against England and the war in the Netherlands. He may also appoint another General at sea and on the mainland. Some here think that the King of France might possibly cede Calais to the King of Spain so that the Spanish fleet might shelter there in case of need.

339. Spaniards volunteer to build a new Armada
                            Rome
                            November 26, 1588
    The Spaniards here announce that the most important places in Spain have offered His Sacred Majesty to build a new Armada of 200 ships and to pay fifty thousand men for it during two years, in order that the expedition against England may continue without interruption. Stores of all kinds are already being purchased here, and at Biscay some ships are being built on English lines, short and broad. His Majesty of Spain has summoned all Grandees of the realm, and the command of the new Armada is to be entrusted to Don Fernando de Toledo, natural son of the late Duke of Alva.

340. Miserable Plight of Spaniards in Ireland
                            Antwerp
                            December 3, 1588
    London letters of the 23rd ult. announce that the Spaniards who landed in savage Ireland with nine ships were beaten and their leaders taken prisoner. Another galleon has reached Plymouth with not more than for people aboard in the most miserable state. The English have met at sea and defeated the Vice-Admiral of Dunkirk with ten vessels. They have brought the Admiral prisoner to England. The other vessels fled to France. In London some 80 warships are said to be getting ready for Don Antonio, and the Hollanders are to give him another 40 at the request of the Queen.

341. The Queen celebrates a Reign of Thirty Years at St. Paul’s
                            Middelburg
                            December 6, 1588
    The 27th November was a holiday in London because on this day Her Majesty completed a reign of thirty years. On the 28th this Queen seems to have been at St. Paul’s Cathedral, where with great pomp and solemnity a public sermon was preached to thank God for victory over the Queen’s enemies. It was also commanded that the Almighty Vanquisher of the enemy should be thanked in like fashion with prayer all over the country and in all churches. The preparations for King Don Antonio are only going on slowly. They appear to be waiting for Barbary to send the money and for Holland and Zeeland to make up their minds.

342. Hamburg thinks the English Blockade will be run
                            Cologne
                            December 15, 1588
    Letters from Hamburg definitely state that the Queen of England has forbidden that town and other seaports likewise, after the last day of December, to export, either to Spain or Portugal, grain, munitions or anything of use for the equipment of ships, on pain of confiscation of the vessel wherever it may be found. But Hamburg adds that it is believed these voyages will not entirely cease, as there are people who for large profits will sail all the same, and will shape a course to the far North.

343. Services of Thanksgiving for Victory
                            Antwerp
                            December 24, 1588
    Letters of the 18th inst. from England announce that during that week in all London churches great services of thanksgiving were held for delivery from the tyrannous projects of the Spaniards against England and against the Queen in particular. Like Pharaoh, the King of Spain has been punished. During these thanksgivings the Queen seemed very magnificent and devout.

344. Turkish Help for England against Spain
                            Constantinople
                            January 3, 1589
    The English ambassador recently handed the Sultan a document requesting him to equip 100 ships to hinder the projects of the King of Spain against the Queen of England. The Englishman declares that he has obtained the Sultan’s consent, and has therefore despatched a special messenger by Poland and Danzig to convey the encouraging news to his Queen. The Sultan will equip himself to support the Queen against the King of Spain as required. The Sultan is supposed to have said that he will sail with this fleet in person. The Englishman seems also to have gained the approval of Hassan Pasha to his sending representatives on to England to behold the Power of his Queen by land and by water and to report on it here.

345. Philip II said to have abdicated
                            Strasburg
                            January 17, 1589
    The Spaniard is said to have handed over crown and sceptre to his youthful Prince out of depression, for His Majesty wishes no longer to take the responsibility of government seeing the manifold ill fortune that has befallen him. This may well entail unusual changes. What next occurs I will report to you, sir, as soon as possible. May God the Lord grant us all prosperity.

346. James VI, having married a Protestant, will succeed Elizabeth
                            Cologne
                            January 26, 1589
    Letters have come here from Hamburg reporting that both Ladies of Denmark are married, one to the King of Scots, the other to a son of Duke Julius of Brunswick. Upon this the Queen of England has declared that she appoints the King of Scots successor to the throne on her death.

347. Spanish Fears of Invasion by Don Antonio
                            Rome
                            February 11, 1589
    We hear from Naples that that kingdom, in addition to the recently announced one million two hundred thousand crowns, has decided to send as much again this year to assist the King of Spain. It is hoped by this to give a good example to the Duchy of Milan. His Majesty is said to have summoned Mr. Vespasian Gonzaga so as to make use of him in Portugal. His Majesty is making all preparations possible against an invasion of Portugal by Don Antonio supported by the Queen of England.

348. An English Fleet will soon take the Sea
                            Cologne
                            February 23, 1589
    News comes to Zeeland that two ships from Barbary have put in there on board of which is an envoy of the King of Fez intending to reside in England. Don Antonio’s envoy has come also. We hear that the English fleet is to sail at the end of this month or by the middle of March, when wind and weather are favourable. On this fleet are to be 20,000 fighting men. This will cause an evil summer. It is supposed they will proceed to India. Many again think that France will support England.
    
    Muley Hamed, 1578-1603, was King of Fez.
349. More Foreign Sailors impressed
                            Hamburg
                            March 16, 1589
    The Spanish fleet has not yet come in, perhaps owing to the great danger caused by the English corsairs who already have 80 vessels at sea. The Queen commands that there be no trade with Spain for six months. Any one who despite this falls into her hands will have his hair plucked. They have already taken some ships from Spain into London and are doing the same every day. The ships are half-stripped, then entirely unloaded, and the cargo confiscated. Then they take the ships and use them in the war, not caring whether they come from friend or foe. The hamburges, Danzigers, Lübeckers carried in there all have to serve. It is a very dangerous game.

350. Spanish Ships being swept off the Sea
                            Middelburg
                            March 9, 1589
    The rumour is circulating that eight vessels from Danzig have been lost in a storm along the English coast. One was looted by the English at Plymouth and a fair sum in cash found on it. Along the west coast of England Spanish ships are brought in daily by the English freebooters. The Hamburg and Danzig vessels brought into Dover were unloaded. The new wheat on board fetched a reasonable sum, but the damp grain went dirt cheap or at any rate at a low figure. The owners do not get much of it. Some gunners who were aboard these ships have been taken to London, and there they, just like the unladen ships, will have to serve in the English fleet. This latter is being strongly armed and 30,000 men are said to be on board. At a certain spot they are to be joined by 10,000 Barbary horsemen, so that Seville and Portugal will have to keep a sharp look-out. The English fleet is still waiting for more men from Holland. Then it will soon sail. England and Scotland are very quiet. The Parliaments are assembled and are said to have voted a large tax.

351. France, Navarre, Poland, Sweden, Barbary and Morocco to join England against the Holy League
                            Brussels
                            March 16, 1589
    It is announced from England that envoys of the Kings of France, Navarre, Poland, Sweden, Barbary and Morocco have arrived to form an alliance against the Holy League. To all appearances nothing can come of this but a great and destructive war. It is confidently asserted that Don Antonio has been in Barbary with forty warships and has fetched these envoys. He seems to have been very courteously received by the King of Morocco, who expressed his readiness to favour the cause of the Queen of England. To oblige Her Majesty he will send an auxiliary force of 30,000 Moors, and furnish all supplies of food and munitions from his own country. All English vessels may get what they require in Barbary and put in there to recuperate.
    It is said that this fleet will set out about 200 sail strong with the first favourable wind. There are stated to be ten to twelve thousand Englishmen and eight to ten companies of Hollander Lancers on board. It is pitiable that so much Christian blood should be shed and not against the hereditary foe.

352. Philip II revives
Venice
March 17, 1589
    In the Arsenal at Constantinople no war galleys have yet taken the water, but by the spring, that is by the middle or end of April, sixty galleys besides the ordinary guardships should be ready. They will proceed to Barbary. But some are confident that the Queen of England is strongly urging the Grand Turk to use this fleet against the King of Spain, and he is quite capable of doing it.
    In letters from Spain of the 4th of February we are informed of the good health of the King, the Prince and the Princess. His Majesty is gratified to hear of the grant of eight millions of ducats which His Majesty’s subjects have offered, in case he should desire further to continue the war against England, but for the present this is not expected.

353. France threatens the Pope
                            Venice
                            April 7, 1589
    When the King of France signified to the Pope that in case he were molested by members of the League he would of necessity be compelled to accept the aid of the Protestant Princes and of England and abandon Metz to the Princes and Boulogne to the Queen of England, the Pope announced that he would abandon the projects of the League.

354. Arrest of an elderly English Spy in Rome
                            Rome
                            April 15, 1589
    During the last few days the Holy Office here arrested a man of sixty. He is accused of being domiciled here at the instance of the Queen of England.

355. Deportation of Portuguese Nobles
                            Antwerp
                            April 22, 1589
    The Portuguese hear from Lyons that the King of Spain has commanded the whole of the Portuguese nobility to come from Portugal to Castile at once. This is a sign that His Majesty is indisposed to trust the Portuguese nobles, and fears that they will afford assistance to Don Antonio if he comes to Portugal with his fleet and lands there. His Majesty is also sending many troops on horse and on foot every day to Portugal, to offer suitable resistance to Don Antonio.

356. Arrest of English and French by the Turks
                            Genoa
                            May 1, 1589
    Our news here is that on April 28 a ship arrived from Barbary. Its Captain is an Englishman by name Thomas Hunt. He reports that by order of the Grand Turk all Frenchmen in Algiers have been arrested and their property confiscated. The same thing has happened in Syria and in Cairo.

357. Danzig still tries to trade with Spain
                            Warsaw, Poland
                            May 3, 1589
    News comes here that the Queen of England has again written to the authorities of Danzig that they must cease their voyages to Spain yet awhile. This is their warning, and the Queen is not to blame if harm comes to them. Nevertheless the Danzigers are getting ten ships ready with miscellaneous cargoes to send off to Lisbon. God protect them from harm, for last year seven well-found ships sailing from Spain to Danzig were lost on the English coast.

358. Reported Defeat of the English off Cape St. Vincent
                            Antwerp
                            May 13, 1589
    We hear this week from London in letters of the 29th ult. that the English fleet has not yet started. But it will be under way with 35,000 men on the first favourable wind. The English have brought in a rich vessel coming from Spanish India. On board were 1200 arobas of cochineal and much gold and silver. It is supposed to be worth about £50,000. This is bad news for the trader. They also write from London that the Earl of Arundel, who conspired with the Queen of Scots against the Queen in England and has been two years in prison, is condemned to death. The character of the English is such that one can well believe this of them. News came in recently from Brussels that the forty English warships, which went lately to Spain and have been for some time off Cape St. Vincent, have been beaten by the Spaniards and have lost fifteen ships.

359. Drake at Corunna
                            unknown
                            unknown
                            background: See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 100, Raid on Corunna.
    On Tuesday the 4th of May at 10 o’clock in the morning Drake appeared with the enemy’s fleet 102 sail strong. They came into the harbour from the sea before a favourable wind without any resistance, and laid themselves alongside Santiago, so far from the town as to be out of range. At 2 o’clock in the afternoon they anchored and put many pikemen ashore, so as to be able to disembark troops. At one spot 500 soldiers were put ashore, at another three companies, with three or four field-pieces, of which they made good use. At another place they disembarked three or four companies, and near Santa Lucia 500 men, 300 musketeers and 200 pikeman. Nearer Corunna they landed over 1000 men. These plundered all the villages near Corunna and burnt down the houses. On the Tuesday aforesaid and on Friday at 4 P.M. Count de Altamira came with some troops, but not in time to do any good. When the enemy saw the great concourse of people, he began at about 9 o’clock a heavy musketry fire on those from the town who were at the town gate. At night the enemy hurled themselves on to the fishing fleet and by 2 o’clock in the morning had taken it. Any one who could not buy his freedom was taken captive. The remainder were killed. This kept Drake busy till Saturday morning. On the same day many troops came up from Santiago and other forts, over 2400 men, under command of a Portuguese Captain. He passed close by the town gate, but his troops fled at once and not a single man remained. On Sunday and Monday 20,000 men should have come to relieve the town of Corunna, but a messenger has just come from Corunna to say that the relief force is not yet there, but that they are expected any moment and the town of Corunna has defended itself bravely.

360. Drake at Lisbon
                            Madrid
                            June 10, 1589
                            background: Gomez Suarez of the Cordua family was made Duke of Feria by Philip II in 1567.
    In our last letters we recounted how the English, after retiring from Corunna, put troops ashore at Peniche in Portugal. As it could offer no resistance, this hamlet surrendered to Don Antonio, who received it graciously and treated it with great considerateness. Then he passed further inland towards Lisbon without meeting any resistance, because the Portuguese all remained inactive and would not use their arms against Don Antonio. When he saw this, he took 10,000 to 12,000 men and marched straight upon Lisbon, and the ships followed him as far as Cascæs. So, on the last day of last month, he arrived half a mile off at Fuente de Alcantara, which is a suburb. When the Cardinal perceived this, he sent the Spaniards, about 2500 of them, four regiments of Portuguese and a few horsemen, to meet the enemy and stop him. But when they came outside the town and the Portuguese were required to fight, it was discovered that they had no stomach for it. So the Count de Fuentes retired again on the town with the Spaniards and Portuguese, in order to prevent the population from declaring for Don Antonio. Thus the English advanced to the suburb, and on the 1st inst. to the wall of the town. There they established themselves. They treated the Portuguese well and did them no harm. The town was completely held by the Spaniards and, to facilitate defence, women and children and other useless folk were put on shore across the river. The English thought to get into the town by Santa Catharina. They attacked twice but were thrown back by the Spaniards with a loss of 300 men and 30 or 40 prisoners. On their retreat, as they were passing over a hill, they were fired upon with heavy guns and much damage was done. The Duke of Braganza has marched to Lisbon on foot with 600 men, and many troops are coming there daily. From Castile extra help is coming with all speed. But when the enemy heard this he retreated on the 5th. On that same day the Duke of Feria was due with 1500 men and some cavalry, as also twenty companies of Spaniards and some more troops besides. So the English moved off in great haste and the cavalry pursued, in order to hamper their embarkation. We hope to hear every hour that further damage has been inflicted on them. It is believed that Don Antonio relied greatly on the Portuguese, because they would not fight against him. A Portuguese nobleman, they are called hidalgos, was caught trying to bring Don Antonio 15,000 ducats. He was executed together with a baptized Moor. This Moor, at the instance of Don Antonio, was supposed to shoot the Count de Fuentes, but he fired at the wrong man and hit him in the arm. He was hanged.
    In their five days’ skirmishing before Lisbon the English are said to have lost some 1000 men. It is doubtful whether their provisions will not run out, so that they will be forced to go home, especially as in Santander and other places ships are getting ready to resist them. The galleys are expected from Italy. Of the Moors we hear nothing at all. They seem, thank God, to be quiet.

361. The English retire from Cascæs
                            Seville
                            June 28, 1589
    News came this week by special messenger that the English Armada sailed away from Cascæs on the 18th inst. suffering from famine, dysentery and plague. They are said to have eaten their own horses. Two thousand Portuguese and 150 monks and priests were with them, but they refused to take them along and left them ashore. These Portuguese will soon be hanged, and it is to be hoped that half the fleet will die, so that it may not be able to come back here over soon. In the meanwhile all the fortresses are being equipped, and two galleasses with 1500 soldiers and five ships more from Sicily and many weapons and fighting men have come in too.

362. Have the English really taken Lisbon?
                            Middelburg
                            June 29, 1589
    Yesterday a boat came over here from Dover to say that the English Armada is lying in the river off Lisbon and that the English have taken Lisbon. The English merchants are betting three sovereigns to one that this news is true. I do not feel sure about it. The boat came with a foul wind. When the wind is fair we shall soon hear more details. I hope to get news soon. Twenty vessels are going from here to the fleet again with men and provisions.

363. Philip tries to raise Money in Italy
                            Genoa
                            July 9, 1589
    The Spanish envoy has done nothing towards obtaining the two millions in Florence that his King wanted to borrow there. With this money the troops should have been carried to Spain and Portugal. To the requests of the Spanish envoy the Grand Duke of Florence answered that he now had no reserve of money, and had already given the King more than his income amounted to. But as his galleys had gone out into the Levant to loot, he hoped that on their return they would bring so much that he would be able to afford assistance to the King with it, and the Pope and the Genoese would help him likewise.

364. Sixty Monks hanged in Lisbon
                            Rome
                            July 15, 1589
    Many weapons are said to have been found in a monastery at Lisbon. So about 60 monks have been hanged there. One of them was the Chamberlain of the Viceroy. They had an understanding with Don Antonio.

365. Dysentery in the English Fleet
                            Middelburg
                            July 25, 1589
    This week letters were received from England saying that the English fleet had come back again because the heat was so great and the soldiers are too much fruit. It was delightfully cool to eat, but as the soldiers were so heated it gave them their death. So half the ships’ complements died, and they were compelled to come home. But an important English commander is said to be still at sea waiting for the Indian fleet.

366. The Queen said to be dead
                            Antwerp
                            July 29, 1589
    The day before yesterday news came over here from Zeeland that the Queen of England is said to be dead. But nothing is mentioned as to when or whether she was previously ill. So it is not much believed. But it would cause great changes in England.

367. German Mercenaries
                            Cologne
                            August 15, 1589
    News comes from England that Signor Horatio Pallavicini has journeyed to Hamburg and Germany with an emissary of the new King of France. He has with him a sum of money from the Queen of England to recruit German troopers. Her Majesty is said to have promised the King of France to place at his disposal a few thousand men at her own expense.

368. The Queen alive and issuing Letters of Marque
                            Antwerp
                            August 19, 1589
    During this week they have been saying the Queen of England was dead and asserting she had died of plague, but yesterday letters of the 9th inst. came from London which do not mention that the Queen has been ill. So it seems to have been only a rumour. But they do write from England that some warships are again being fitted out, and that the Queen intends to issue letters of marque, so that all ships of whatever origin bound for Spain or Portugal can be captured. Perhaps this is what the warships are being got ready for. The Queen had better be careful not to bring more enemies about her ears than she has already.

369. English Prisoners’ Account of the Plans of Don Antonio
unknown
unknown
background: Undated statement of English prisoners about their fleet.
    They say that they set out from Plymouth with 220 sail on April 13, 1589. Among them were five Queen’s galleons and sixteen other large ships, and other ships of all sorts from 112 to 280 tons, also five galleys with seven benches on each side. They took ship 20,000 men strong and were provisioned for two months. Of this they had consumed fifteen days in Plymouth harbour before they could get away.
    The prisoners state further that the Queen made the following arrangement with Don Antonio:
    First of all she granted him for his voyage to Portugal 220 ships, on board of which were 15,000 soldiers and 5000 sailors. Don Antonio pledged himself to reduce all Portugal to obedience one week after the arrival of the Armada. For this purpose he had with him letters from the chief people in the kingdom. Don Antonio asserted that he would meet with no resistance in Lisbon and that he would get more troops to help him gain his kingdom. He signed the following engagements:
    Two months after arrival in Lisbon he is to pay Her Majesty five millions in gold for the expenses of the Armada; moreover, he pledges himself as a token of good friendship to deliver in London yearly 300,000 ducats. The English are to enjoy safe and unimpeded entry by sea to Portugal and Portuguese India; the same obtaining for the Portuguese in England, and both sides are to maintain good friendship. When the Queen equips an Armada at Lisbon against Spain, Don Antonio is to give assistance. All castles and fortresses throughout Portugal are to be permanently occupied by English soldiers at the cost of Don Antonio. Perpetual peace is concluded between the two kingdoms, and they are to assist each other on all occasions.
    All bishoprics and archbishoprics are to be filled by English Catholics. Don Antonio declared that when he arrived at Lisbon with the troops he would give twelve months’ pay and three more as reward. Also he would allow twelve days’ looting, only they must inflict no wrong on any member of the Portuguese nation whether high or low. Also churches and ecclesiastical property must not be injured or anything taken out of them. Everything must be paid for in cash. These were the Queen’s commands, signed in London.

370. Papal Thanksgivings
                            Rome
                            September 9, 1589
    Seeing that Portugal is now safe from the English fleet, the Pope with the whole College of Cardinals went yesterday in procession on foot to the Spanish Church of Minerva and there sang and recited all manner of psalms and sermons of praise and thanksgiving. Afterwards he did the same in the Portuguese church of San Antonio.

371. Five Ships reach Spain in safety
                            Madrid
                            September 22, 1589
    On the 15th inst., praise be to God, there came safely into Lisbon the five vessels expected from India, to wit: San Cristophoro, Santa Maria, Nostra Señora de la Concepcion, San Antonio and Santa Cruz. They started from the Azores on August 5, but owing to foul winds had to put back again. For greater safety three hundred well-armed veteran soldiers were taken on board, as they had learnt that thirty English and other corsair ships were on their way to the Azores, to lie in wait for them. May God grant the same good fortune in future!

372. Henry IV at Paris
                            Middelburg
                            November 9, 1589
    The only news we have is that the King of Navarre with a very strong force marched to Paris on the 23rd ult., and gave orders that a portion of his troops should pursue those of the League. The King has left the Scotch behind in Dieppe as garrison, the other English troops have marched with him.

373. A further Appeal to the Turks for Help
                            Rome
                            November 18, 1589
    They say that an envoy of the Queen of England has started from near here by sea to Constantinople to obtain help against the Catholics in France. On the arrival of this envoy the Grand Turk has accordingly given orders in several localities, but especially in Chios, that all efficient shipwrights and artisans should come to Constantinople as soon as possible.

374. English Money for Henry IV
                            Antwerp
                            November 25, 1589
    Letters from London of the 18th inst. have been received this week announcing that the Queen of England has recently sent £20,000 to France for the King of Navarre. They write also that the King of Scots is said to have gone to Denmark in person, in order to accompany his wife from there. But it has been reported from Hamburg that this Lady has already gone to Scotland. Which is correct we shall hear.

375. Some Spanish Ships are safe, but where are the rest?
                            Lyons
                            December 1, 1589
    From Madrid in Spain comes news of the 11th inst. [sic] that twelve vessels from India have reached San Lucar with general cargoes, but the big ships which are to bring some twelve millions worth have not yet arrived. They are supposed to have steered a different course for greater safety. There are still 25 English raiders at sea which are said to have attacked and pillaged Valenga and carried off some vessels from Brazil and Porto Rico. But, as the entire fleet from New Spain with its escort numbers over 80 vessels, it is hoped that it will be able to get past the English without damage. Others report that news has come in these letters from Spain that the fleet from New Spain has separated into two divisions. Twenty-eight of the largest ships with the bulk of the valuables have taken a different route, but of their whereabouts nothing is known, whereas the majority of the fleet, that is 60 vessels with the less valuable cargo, came the most direct way and reached Seville on the 12th. Seven of them were damaged in a storm and a few sunk. However, most of the property on board was recovered. The Spanish Court awaits news of the 41 remaining ships with the utmost eagerness.

376. Heavy Trade Losses caused by the English
                            Antwerp
                            December 16, 1589
    Letters from Zeeland report that they have received letters there from Lisbon with the news that owing to a storm thirty vessels of the New Spain fleet could not come in, and that fifteen of them have been lost. The English corsairs have taken seven vessels of this fleet, the rest is still at sea, and is being chased by the English. This tidings has caused the greatest consternation here on Change and many bankruptcies are to be feared.

377. Elizabeth a Knight of gay and indomitable spirit
                            Venice
                            January 15, 1590
    Some people assert that they have read letters arrived from Lyons by the latest post reporting the great preparations for war in France, Germany and England on behalf of the King of Navarre. The English Queen would seem to be specially well disposed towards him, and as token of her good will has sent him the English Order of the Garter, and written that she will never desert him, and will use all her power to put him on the throne of France. To this news some add that the King of Navarre, when he becomes King of France, will give her the Order of St. Michael in return, for she is a Knight, he says, because of her gay and indomitable spirit, of which she has more than is to be found in other women. She has valiantly defended herself against the power of such great and mighty foes, against two of the greatest Kings in the world, whom she grievously insulted, and she has preserved her realm despite attempts to split it into factions, to propagate discord, and to invade it with a powerful Armada.
    Letters of the 19th ult. arrived from Constantinople lat Monday with news of the return of Hassan Aga, General-at-sea. He is ill seen, however, owing to his lack of success in the expedition against Barbary. Better measures shall in future be taken at Constantinople to prevent the Christian corsairs from doing so much damage. An ambassador from Persia is expected at Constantinople, and great preparations are being made for his reception. A big navy is also being equipped, and some say that peace between the King of Spain and the Grand Turk has come to nothing, because the King tried to include in the peace all the Princes of the House of Austria, especially the Emperor and the Isle of Malta. But the Grand Turk will consent to nothing more than the conclusion of peace with the King of Spain and all his territories, in whatever part of the world they may be. However, hope of a favourable result has not entirely disappeared. There is plague and great scarcity in Constantinople, and the poor are suffering grievously. Hassan Aga’s galleys are in such bad condition that they would have succumbed if they had met the Spaniards on the way. They say here that the Queen of England is very ill; she is in danger of her life, and in the grip of some terrible disease.

378. English Loot not so very great after all
                            Venice
                            January 26, 1590
    They write from Lisbon on the 2nd ult. that there is news from the Azores that Admiral Alvaro de Flores, after the English had fought him and had failed to do him any damage, brought himself and his ships into safety. He is said to have had four millions on board and to have received useful assistance in driving off the corsairs. He was to be escorted to Seville where the three ships with the 12 1/2 millions just mentioned have arrived from Peru. The English loot does not exceed 500,000 crowns, though the French give out that it amounts to several millions in gold.
    From Madrid, dated the 15th ult., comes the announcement that ship construction continues in Biscay, and 60 large vessels are expected to be ready in the spring. No vessel either in the harbours or arriving there is allowed to leave. It is also stated that sailors have been sent for from Italy and gunners from Germany. A nobleman of Alexandria is said to have promised to produce 200 such gunners soon, if His Majesty will give him a few men and a little ammunition to drill with. Some declare they have seen an agent of the Queen of England here who has asked the government to hand him over for cash 6000 muskets. But this was at once refused, as the arms were sure to be used against the Catholics.

379. Cumberland reaches England with immense Spoil
                            Antwerp
                            January 27, 1590
    London letters to here report that the Earl of Cumberland and his ships have reached England with immense spoil. He has come to London in person with the mail. On two of the Indian vessels there would seem to have been 400,000 marks in silver, 250 chests of cochineal each weighing 130 lbs., 8000 ox hides and a quantity of other valuable goods. On one of the ships, moreover, were the Governor of Mexico and his son. They have been taken to England. This loss of the Indian vessels will cause much sorrow in Spain and elsewhere.

380. Probable Bankruptcies in Seville
                            Antwerp
                            February 13, 1590
    London letters of the 25th ult. have been received this week. They mention that Lord Cumberland has come to England with sixteen Indian ships which he has taken. Rather a high figure. From another London source we are notified that the Indian ships which the English have taken had over 20,000 lbs. of cochineal on board. Also a high figure. There were other goods on board, and gold and silver as well. This is a serious loss for traders, and it is to be feared that Seville will not get through without bankruptcies. In our business here things are none too good either. God the Lord protect each one of us from harm!

381. Failing Turkey, Elizabeth turns to Fez and Morocco
                            Venice
                            March 2, 1590
                            background: George Clifford, third Earl of Cumberland, 1558-1605, the well-known English sailor. Fought against the Armada in 1588. In vessels placed at his disposal by the Queen he made raids upon Spain and, in concert with Drake, on the West Indies. In 1591 he sailed to Portugal in Royal ships and carried off rich booty. In 1592 he received the Order of the Garter, in 1593 with John Burgh he carried off the chief vessels of the Spanish Indian fleet, in 1597 he made his great expedition to Porto Rico. He was called the Don Quixote of the sea and died heavily in debt.
    Some merchants here have received news that the Queen of England is vexed because her vigorous efforts to procure the despatch of a Turkish fleet against the King of Spain have failed. She hears with indignation that peace with His Majesty has been prolonged for another three years. So her thoughts and proposals have turned towards the Kings of Fez and Morocco, who are to be made to feel the suzerainty of the King of Spain burdensome. She is said to have persuaded them, if she should send a fleet to Portugal, to provide her with assistance, 15,000 men and 20,000 crowns a month, for the duration of the war. They are also to help in provisioning her fleet, and if required open their harbours to her.

382. Captured Spanish Letters being decoded in London
                            Middelburg
                            March 22, 1590
    Monsieur van Aldegonde, who at the time of the fall of Antwerp was mayor of the city, is said to be on a visit to the Queen of England in London, in order to decode for her some intercepted Spanish and Lorraine letters written in cipher and presumed to be from the King of Spain. He is subsequently to go to the King of Navarre, to whom he will naturally communicate many secrets contained in them.

383. The English spare no one
                            Hamburg
                            April 8, 1590
    From London we hear nothing of the cash supposed to have arrived there. Not only here but at Frankfurt and in the country of Holstein the English Merchant Adventurers have been trying to raise a sum of money at interest. But they have got none, as their credit is not good. From Lisbon they write that the King of Spain is fitting out vessels against the English corsairs. These corsairs spare no one with their rapine and theft, and do much damage to ships from Peru and other places. But latterly they have attacked private individuals mostly and not the King. So the hapless merchant has to be plucked. God comfort the sufferers!

384. A Scotch Alchemist at Prague
                            Venice
                            March 30, 1590
                            background: The once celebrated Mamugnano’s real name was Mamugna. He was a Greek Cypriote. He came to Italy in 1578 and attracted much attention by his arts, especially at Venice. In 1588, calling himself Count Marco Bragadini, he went to Germany and created a great stir at Vienna, and still more at the Court of Rudolph II at Prague. At Munich too he met with considerable success at first, but ultimately by order of the Duke he was hanged as a cheat on a tinselled gallows in 1590.
    We hear from Spain that the kingdom fears the Queen of England will send her fleet again this spring to raid coast towns. The King is taking useful counter-measures and assembling many ships in Corunna harbour. A letter from Prague states that a native of Scotland has arrived there with thirty-five horses. He gives himself out as a real artist who knows how to make gold, and is not inferior to Mamugnano in Venice.

385. Brunswick Mercenaries for Holland
                            Antwerp
                            March 31, 2590
    The rumour is circulating that the Queen of England is raising 1200 horse in Brunswick for the Hollanders, so that they may at once keep the Prince of Parma occupied and prevent him from giving so much assistance to the League in France. So we shall have a bad summer in this country, since the Queen of England is also equipping a much larger number of foot for these Hollanders.

386. The Spaniards suspected of Designs on Ireland
                            Antwerp
                            May 26, 1590
    Letters of the 25th inst. have come from London saying that no Spanish fleet has arrived in Ireland, though it is stated that the Governor of Ireland is in league with the Spaniards and has therefore been arrested. The Queen of England seems to have sent ten thousand men under Colonel Norris to Ireland because she is suspicious of the Spanish fleet. Some have also been informed that the Queen is in bad health.

387. Hamburg Deputation to the Queen
                            Staden
                            July 12, 1590
    The Hamburgers despatched some representatives to the Queen of England a week ago. They are going to request that their ancient traditions and usages may remain intact, and that no innovations infringing them be introduced. We shall no doubt hear what the Queen’s answer will be. Much strange talk is going round, but nobody knows any real foundation for it. Eight members of the Common Council were deputed by the Aldermen to make this journey, and what the Aldermen do the Common Council will have to do also. God the Lord grant that all may turn out for the best!

388. Negotiations in Germany
                            Hamburg
                            July 15, 1590
    What the English envoy, Horatio Pallavicini, has obtained from the secular German Princes for his Queen is unknown, but the tale is that he has had poor success as he went to them with empty hands. He returned to Staden a week ago and sailed the next day express to England. As the wind is fair he should get to London within four days.

389. Secret Councils in Madrid
                            Rome
                            July 14, 1590
                            background: Rodrigo de Castro was Cardinal of Seville 1583-1600. Caspar de Quiroga was Cardinal of Toledo 1577-1594.
    Letters from Madrid in Spain report that His Majesty holds one secret council weekly with the Cardinals of Seville and Toledo, his confessor and other ecclesiastics. Also no secrets must be committed to writing, as letters may be intercepted and opened.

390. Appeal of the English Ambassador to the Turk
Constantinople
8 November 1589
background: Copy of a petition addressed by the English ambassador to the Sultan.
    It has pleased the Almighty to make me the chief instrument in the most Holy Alliance between my exalted Mistress the Queen of England and Your Imperial Majesty. With the utmost zeal and fidelity have I laboured through a period of eight years in order that to the greater glory of God, our common foes, all of them accursed idolaters, might through the great power entrusted unto us be utterly destroyed. Now from the Councillors of Your Magnificence I received four years since a solemn oath that your magnificence would begin a war with the King of Spain if my Mistress, who hitherto had lived in profound peace with the King of Spain, the chief of all idolaters, should chance to make war with him. Never have I ceased to beg and to implore my Mistress to make war. And she herself has withal dissolved the ancient alliance with Spain and commenced a most furious struggle by land and by sea, which during the space of three years she has waged with the greatest success. Although the Spaniard has demanded peace of my Mistress on divers untoward conditions, yet has she never granted it to him. I have on the contrary in my despatches always dissuaded her from peace and incessantly promised her that Your Magnificence, loyal to your early promises, was on the point of preparing a formidable fleet. During this time my Mistress has so long waited that she has begun to doubt my loyalty, for I have many enemies who assure my Mistress that your Magnificence will not make war, therefore I expect daily a letter from my Mistress to recall me, and on my return I fear to lose my head in consequence. Your Magnificence will now comprehend what an unjust fate is meted out to me on the part of both your Majesties as reward for my devoted efforts. Therefore I implore Your Magnificence in the name of the Most High God to have regard for an innocent man, and at length, if you desire not to despatch all your terrible forces against that idolater, then at least to send forth 60 or 80 galleys to his undoing, and moreover into those neighbouring territories from which he has withdrawn all his forces to oppose my Mistress. these provinces will be all the easier to devastate as they are entirely void of troops and will thus be more easily subjected to your empire. I conjure Your Magnificence to use this most favourable moment for your glory and the aggrandisement of your kingdom. God has created you the most renowned of men and the greatest of all princes; may He bless you with all good fortune for the destruction of this idolater. But if you contemn my Mistress and esteem of little worth the great deeds she, a woman, has so valiantly done in the war, her wrath will be great against you, and the world will reproach you hereafter for the basest ingratitude in that you have forsaken that monarch who has been your most faithful comrade. Confiding in the friendship and promises of Your Magnificence, she has exposed her life and her realm for the sake of Your Magnificence to such dangers that they cannot be described. But now it will be the heart’s desire of the Spaiard utterly to destroy my Mistress, for she has refused him peace; and he can put complete trust in the help of the Pope, of all other idolatrous Princes, and of the Emperor. Then he will turn his invincible forces to your overthrow and that of your realm, that he may be the only sovereign. For the Pope ceases not to encompass him with his lying prophecies, and the Pope is looked upon by these rulers as in some wise a God upon earth. But if your Magnificence in concert with my Mistress goes to war at sea wisely, valiantly and without delay, as God Almighty of a surety enjoins in accordance with your pledged word at this favourable moment and to the great glory of Turkey and of her people and the general welfare of your realm—then the proud Spaniard and the lying Pope will be cheated of their assured hope of victory and will suffer chastisement for their presumption. God will protect us alone and will punish these idolaters more severely by our means. On beholding this, all those who live as heretics will return to our faith, and He will bless us, who strive for His glory, with victories untold.

391. Hamburgers looted off Harwich
                            Middelburg
                            July 19, 1590
    The sixteen warships of the Queen of England are still lying at Plymouth. Of the Spanish Armada we hear nothing. Ten English vessels laden with merchandise from Liguria, Civita Vecchia, Marseilles, Venice and Tripoli fought with the Spanish galleys for seven hours. One was destroyed, the rest have reached London. They are said to have killed many Spaniards. Two Hamburg vessels have arrived in London. They were looted off Harwich by an English pirate who had letters of marque from the King of Navarre. They seem to have carried about £6000 worth of cargo. The injured parties persuaded the Admiral to send a pinnace after the pirate to obtain the release of the property, as their passport provided that they should be totally unmolested. English and foreigners had property on these vessels. These are hard times for traders.

392. The English make many Enemies
                            Middelburg
                            August 5, 1590
    Pallavicini is proceeding to France with an English gentleman. The German Princes are providing help to the King of Navarre at his own cost, but he requires help at their expense on the ground of his long-standing alliance with them. There is trouble between the English and the Hamburgers. As they are making naval preparations it is possible that they have designs against the English, or perhaps against the citizens of Staden, which city the English turn the whole world against them. They have held up many Holland ships and the Queen’s Admiral with his pinnaces loots everything he comes upon, without meeting any resistance.

393. The Scotchman enters Prague in state
                            Prague
                            August 14, 1590
    On a Monday recently a Scotchman said to be an adept in the black arts came into the town. He moved in with forty fine horses ridden by twenty of his servants and with three coaches. One of these is very handsome and upholstered in red velvet. He rode in it himself. He occupies magnificent apartments in the Old Town and is visited by many of the Nobility and Gentry. Whether he will stay here long is unknown.

394. Strange Behaviour of the French Ambassador at Constantinople
                            Constantinople
                            August 20, 1590
    The English envoy has obtained this much, that fairly energetic preparations are to be seen, in particular orders have been given for fresh galleys to be built by next spring. But there is more talk than reality in this. The French envoy has managed to be taken on again as ambassador. So he declares that he will remain here after all. For a journey he wanted to make he applied for 5000 crowns to a distinguished Jew, and the latter refused his request. Upon this the envoy, with the help of three renegades whom he used as witnesses, accused the Jew of having stolen from Don Antonio and brought here 1 1/2 millions in gold. Wherefore the Jew was sent to the galleys till he should pay down the money. He has already surrendered 20,000 gold pieces to the Grand Vizier, and to the Sultan a note of hand for 160,000 ducats obtained from the Prince of Wallachia. He has also presented him with a diamond chain valued at 200,000 ducats and various other articles put at 100,000 ducats. But he is still on the galley and will have to hand over the rest. Thus he is getting some of the reward he deserves and will serve others as a warning not to trust in future to loyalty and good faith here.

395. The Turks are tricking the English, and do not mean to fight
                            Constantinople
                            August 27, 1590
                            background: The Usbeks are a Turkish tribe which during the 16th century aimed at possession of Baku, Khiva and Bokhara. To this day their territory reaches the Caspian.
    The Grand Vizier has summoned the Persians in residence here and required them to write to their master as soon as possible that the Sultan has rejected the embassy and the request of their master, as he is unable to give assistance against the Usbeks. It would seem as though he were helping the latter against the Persians. Every one had better ponder this well, especially the English, who brag that they are bamboozling the Sultan and driving him into war with the Spaniards. If necessity should arise they will receive the same answer as the Persians, and, although the Grand Vizier has promised the English envoy 200 galleys next year and admonished him to urge his Queen to persevere in the struggle, the envoy will see just a little of this support in future as hitherto. The Grand Vizier has, moreover, indicated to certain Turks of good position that this English envoy is still a young man and is being treated as his youth deserves. Neither the envoy nor his queen will ever see the Sultan granting the Queen of England a fleet at his own cost unless with all due formality she puts down cash for expenses beforehand and gives ample security for all loss. Then perhaps something might be done.

396. The Turks will really fight in the Spring
                            Constantinople
                            September 15, 1590
    There is much talk here of a hundred galleys together with the ships from the Archipelago being sent out from here next spring on the side of the Queen of England and the King of Navarre. Mohammed Pasha, now in retirement, married to the only sister of the present Sultan, is to be appointed to the supreme command of this fleet.

397. Spanish Escort for the Peru Fleet
                            Venice
                            October 27, 1590
    Madrid, under date the 21st ult., confirms the arrival of two galliots from New Spain and Portugal. They bring 2 1/2 millions in gold to the King and report that the Peru fleet remains behind very richly laden. So 34 large and well-armed ships have put out from Galicia to escort this fleet and clear the sea of the English and French pirates.

398. The English cannot bear the wet and cold of Flanders
                            Antwerp
                            October 27, 1590
    The States General are alleged to be embarking some troops to send to Flanders and join the English. But we have letters from London of the 16th inst. which make no mention of the English coming over. As the weather has come on very wet6 we hear that the English will not be over again this year, as they do not bear the cold well. So not much will be done in Flanders during the winter season.

399. The Turks are not really arming
                            Constantinople
                            October 27, 1590
    Although all sorts of orders have been issued for the equipment of a fleet next spring, and many think we shall see something impressive, there is little trace of it all here, and the Arsenal is empty to such a degree that there are not enough stores to fit out properly four or five galleys at a pinch.

400. The English are robbing Hollanders and Zeelanders
                            Antwerp
                            November 3, 1590
    We hear from Zeeland that the English corsairs are said to have taken 26 vessels, both Hollander and Zeelander coming from Spain and mostly laden with salt, also two vessels with valuable cargoes from Zeeland on their way to Spain. As the English are thus robbing the Hollanders and Zeelanders and confiscating their ships, these latter might soon denounce their alliance with the English and try to come to terms with the King. Great losses and injuries soon part friends.

401. More English Captures at Sea
                            Antwerp
                            November 10, 1590
    This evening letters come again from London by Zeeland, dated the last of last month, stating that the English corsairs have captured and brought to England twelve vessels on their way from San Domingo. They are laden with quantities of sugar, ginger and hides. The English seem to have found out from the passengers and crews that the fleet from Peru and New Spain is about to sail. They have also discovered the route this fleet means to take, so they have placed themselves upon it in order to lie in wait.

402. The Turks hard at work arming
                            Venice
                            December 7, 1590
    Under date October 26, we are advised from Constantinople that the envoy of His Imperial Majesty in His Majesty’s name has offered the customary gifts to the Grand Turk and has made other presentations to the chief Pashas at the Porte. The plague is committing great ravages in the city. Eighteen clerks at the Porte have been punished for forgery. The chief one was executed, the rest either had their hands cut off or were sent to the galleys. The Arsenal is hard at work on a fleet. It is asserted that this is being done at the instance of the Queen of England. But in private the presumption is that it is due to the revolt in Africa, which spreads daily to the great detriment of the Turks.

403. Valuable Prizes taken by the English
                            Antwerp
                            December 9, 1590
    It is confirmed from Zeeland that on the 17th ult. the English brought a big Venetian ship of 800 tons bound from Lisbon to the Barbary coast into Plymouth to be unloaded. It carried 1200 sacks of corn as stores for the Viceroy, and five barrels of gold for the payment of the garrison. From there this ship was to have sailed to Alicante to take in a cargo of Spanish wool. The ship has as well 544 bags of pepper, 388 chests of sugar belonging to Rafaele Fontani, and Giuliano Naso of Florence, and to Ludovico Vesato. These goods will presumably be liberated, although the English had already unloaded 400 bags of pepper. But they have been ordered to put them in the Queen’s warehouse. The ship Maria Margherita, likewise captured by the English, had on board 300 bags of pepper, 160 chests of sugar and 7 bales of raw silk. It is to be hoped that all this will be released. However, the cash and jewels belonging to the passengers and worth well over 15,000 ducats are probably lost. We have definite news too from the Portuguese that the ship called La Capitania has also been taken by the English. On board of it there seem to have been the Viceroy and 1500 nobles, an enormous quantity of money and much other merchandise. This ship left Lisbon last month for Portuguese India, but only got to the Cape of Good Hope and then sailed back to Lisbon because it was too late for it to complete its voyage to Portuguese India this year.

404. Hawkins suspected of Treachery
                            Antwerp
                            December 22, 1590
    Last summer the Queen of England had a fleet at sea of which an English Knight, Captain Hawkins, was Admiral. His duty was to prevent the Spanish fleet from reaching Brittany, but against the wishes of his fellow Captains he let it through. When he returned home with his fleet and appeared in person before the Queen, she sent him home to his estate. He is said to be under secret observation for fear of his escaping, for the Queen strongly suspects that not only he but some other important gentlemen have a private understanding with the King of Spain.

405. Work at Constantinople continues
                            Constantinople
                            January 3, 1591
    The English agent is summoned by Uluch Ali almost daily for consultation about the often discussed fleet and expedition. Armaments, too, are being pushed on rapidly, and the Grand Vizier is at the Arsenal himself every day. But the universal opinion, supported also by appearances, is that this year it will not be possible to put to sea with 300 galleys.

406. Elizabeth demands a Loan from all Rich People
                            Antwerp
                            January 15, 1591
    London Letters of the 3rd inst. say that a report is circulating there that the King of Spain is dead. The Queen of England has demanded a loan of money from all rich people. Each of them, in proportion to his means, must lend without interest for a year. She has sent powder and munitions of war to France and is arming busily.

407. A Religious Rising in Palestine
                            Venice
                            January 15, 1591
    English merchants here declare that their Queen has given orders for the release of all Venetian ships stopped by English raiders.
    The Levantine Jews here say that they gather from letters of the 29th ult. from Tripoli and of the 21st from Aleppo that there is a vast religious rising along the borders of Palestine under the command of two men who give themselves out for true prophets and interpreters of the laws of Mahomet, and assert that they have been sent by the coming Messiah to lead the people back from darkness to the light and the truth.

408. Letter from the Sultan to the French King
Constantinople
29 December 1590
background: Specimen of a letter from Sultan Murad to Henry, Emperor or Padishah of France.
    We desire that it may be made known to you that the English envoy resident at Our happy and glorious Porte has addressed a petition to Our happy Porte and delivered to Us letters from the Queen of England saying: that the King of Spain, who hitherto has had nothing to fear from Our country, has occupied Portugal and expelled the King of Portugal, Don Antonio, from his kingdom. And, not content with this ill deed, he is laying plans for war against you and wishes to drive you too from your kingdom. Now for many years we have maintained close friendship with the Kings of France and have promised to treat the subjects of France as Our own, so that they might not be incommoded nor injured in the slightest degree. By the help and grace of the Almighty Creator we will this year send out a number of Our galleys, and next year will equip 300. In command of these will be the very vigilant, prudent, sagacious, veteran in war, most richly adorned with all virtues and withal most fortunate servant of Our most happy and exalted Porte, after Ourself the most distinguished man in the Empire, the highest Lord and Governor, Our Vizier Sinan Pasha. He will be placed at the head of Our army as Commander-in-chief, he will command in the war at sea, for within Our realm the equipment of galleys has already commenced. We have already reminded the Queen of England in Our letters that she also should equip her ships for Our assistance. It is therefore necessary that, on reception of Our letters through the English envoy, you should not do less than the kingdom of England. You must be steadfast in assembling your army and in keeping it prepared. If, on the part of the King of Spain, war should be begun, and he should molest Us, you must not be found unready. Our armament will, with the help of the Almighty Creator, be completed in good time and will be despatched to your aid at a fitting moment without fail. When this aid comes into being you will not only be strengthened, but your heart will rejoice thereat. To attain this object you must spare no trouble.
    To confirm this despatch we furnish it with Our own Sign Manual.
    May this message be favourably received. Fare well and happily.

409. Letter from the Sultan to the Queen
Constantinople
January 20, 1591
background: Specimen of a letter from the Sultan to the Queen of England.
    On reception of Our letter you are to know that your letters have reached Our happy and exalted Porte. Inasmuch as for some years past no danger has threatened the King of Spain from Our country, he has expelled the King of Portugal, Don Antonio, from his realm and occupied Portugal. Not content therewith he has for many years been attacking Henry, King of France, who has maintained friendship with Our happy and most mighty Porte, after the same manner as Don Antonio, and has been minded to expel him from the kingdom of France. He has not ceased, day and night, to molest him. Therefore Burton, in residence at Our blessed and exalted Porte, communicated to Us in a petition that the King of Spain has subjected Portugal to his authority. This kingdom adjoins the Kingdom of Fez, and Don Antonio asked from the Prince of Fez assistance, to wit that the Prince of Fez should grant him the help of his army. They mutually promised to provide the costs, in such wise that Don Antonio is to pay cash so soon as he gains possession of Portugal. To confirm this his promise he consented to furnish a hostage and did indeed send his own son as hostage to the Prince of Fez. Then he attacked Portugal by sea. The faithless Prince of Fez sent to Don Antonio’s assistance neither men nor money. When Don Antonio saw that he had been deceived, he broke off the war at sea and returned safe and sound to England to fight again later. After the intentions of the Prince of Fez had become evident, you requested me to send an envoy to this prince to fetch back the son of Don Antonio. but he not only refused to return him but actually arrested your merchants trading in Fez, stole their goods, and incarcerated the merchants themselves to please the King of Spain. Others again he has killed under torture in prison. All your businesses carried on in the kingdom of Fez and all your interests existing in other localities have been described to Us in the petition of your envoy delivered by him into Our own hands. Our profound wisdom has comprehended this. With the help of the Almighty Creator we will despatch some galleys this year, but next year, by the aid of the Almighty and Most Merciful Creator, we will send three hundred galleys and some galleons. Our fleet will be commanded by the most vigilant, wisest veteran in war, the most richly endowed with all virtues, the chiefest of officials, a governor, after Ourself the bearer of the highest dignities at Our brilliant and blessed Porte, Our Grand Vizier Sinan Pasha. May the Almighty Creator be his helper. We have determined to send him as General against the kingdom of Spain, and Our orders unchangeable and all-compelling have already been despatched to Our Captains commanding at sea. Other affairs and other circumstances you already know from letters which have been sent to you. It is essential that you too should at once devote the utmost care to military affairs and exert all your powers to raise within your realm the largest army possible and to equip the greatest possible number of ships. After reception of Our letters you should by no means delay, but must at once in all quarters of your kingdom equip an army and also royal ships that they, in concert with Our ships, which will sail from here, may, with your approval, capture as many places as possible. In Our Arsenal and throughout Our Empire preparations are being made with unparalleled efficiency for the construction of galleys, and all places suitable for the building of galleys are being used for the purpose to the uttermost. Without pause, by day and by night, we cease not to urge on and to push forward with the help of the Almighty Creator the ships which we intend to equip so that they may be able to face all tempests. The King of France also is recruiting his subjects and commands them not to move from their houses and not to leave their homes. We will send him help and we are confirming this in a letter which we are addressing to him. Keep peace with him and encourage each other with firm and steadfast mind. To the Prince of Fez we are forwarding strongly worded despatches insisting on the return of the son of Don Antonio to Our most happy and exalted Porte. We are also addressing stern orders to the Prince of Fez for the liberation of the merchants imprisoned in Fez and for permission for them to pursue their avocations in that realm without hindrance. These are being conveyed by trusty messengers in safe galleys. In this manner he cannot possibly be disobedient to Us. We wish you health and that in future you may be able to furnish Us with useful tidings.
    In this manner, honoured Sir, I give you a specimen of letters such as the Sultan writes to the Queen of England and to the King of France. The letters of the Grand Vizier are of the same nature. They do not differ from those of the Sultan. We have no other news.
                        
410. The Pope declares Henry of Navarre a Heretic
                            Rome
                            January 26, 1591
    After holding some Congregations about French affairs, the pope has sent the Nuncio in Paris 60,000 crowns in addition to the monthly contribution of 15,000 crowns for the League. Besides this the Pope will send Briefs to Cardinals Vendôme, Lenoncourt and Gondi and to other clergy, and will excommunicate them if they do not abandon the King of Navarre. This latter the Pope is now calling a heretic, and a rebel against the Church of Christ who has forfeited his claims to the French Crown. Similar Briefs are to be addressed to all nobles in France and also to all the Princes of the League, reminding them of their duty and allegiance and encouraging them to pursue and utterly extirpate the heretics.
Pierre de Gondi, 1533-1616, Cardinal and Bishop of Paris. A zealous supporter of Henry IV, who co-operated enthusiastically in the King’s reconciliation with Rome.
Philippe de Lenoncourt, Cardinal and Archbishop of Rheims, 1526-1591.
Charles, Cardinal of Vendôme, of the House of Bourbon, 1523-1590.

411. Active preparations for a Turkish Fleet
                            Constantinople
                            February 2, 1591
    The extensive preparations for a Turkish fleet are being pushed forward with daily increasing energy, and only during the last week many messengers about the business have been sent out. Considerable mystery is still being made over it, and influential people, Turks and others, say that an enterprise of the sort is not so easily carried out as is generally believed. Uluch Ali says they are going to sail where the Christians are least prepared for them.
    The English envoy here rejoices at the Turkish fleet and has recently sent some of his staff to England. He has also attended a Council to discuss whether the son of Don Antonio should be demanded from the King of Fez and brought here. Orders about this have already been issued and sent from here to Jaffa by land. For the greater security of this mission it will be sent by water.

412. Drake is about to sail
                            Antwerp
                            February 2, 1591
    All we hear from England is that over there in London 30 ships are ready to sail under Captain Drake, the Earl of Cumberland and several other gentlemen, to lie in wait for the Spanish fleet.
    The King of Scots is to send out 4000 soldiers to the King of Navarre at his own expense next March. The Queen of England, however, is to pay them for six months.
    Lisbon letters of the 18th ult. report that not far from there the English carried off a vessel, causing a loss to Giovanni Battista Revallo of 50,000 crowns and to other merchants of about 80,000.

413. English Raiders off Cape St. Vincent
                            Venice
                            February 15, 1591
    The English here state that 60 English raiders are already off Cape St. Vincent to stop the Spanish ships sailing out to escort the fleet from New Spain.
    Some Genoese traders have made an offer to the King of Spain to guard the Straits of Gibraltar at their own expense, but they require the King to pay them five per cent on the goods passing through.

414. English Money to Hamburg for Mercenaries
                            Cologne
                            February 21, 1591
    Two ships from London are expected at Hamburg. They will be escorted there by eight warships, and are to bring £100,000 in cash to raise troops for the Queen of England and the King of Navarre.

415. Extensive Recruitment in Germany
                            Düsseldorf
                            March 3, 1591
                            background: William IV, the Wise, Landgrave of Hesse-Cassel, 1531-1592.
    It is confidently announced that representatives of the King of Navarre and of the Queen of England have received permission to recruit 6000 horse and 12,000 foot for Navarre and England in the territories of the Dukes of Saxony, Brunswick and Hesse. The representatives have brought over 160,000 ducats and have offered to deposit these with the Elector of Saxony. The Queen of England proposes to send 3000 lancers and 6000 Swiss to the Netherlands to prevent the Duke of Parma from taking a larger part in the war in France. The German troops are to be assembled and trained in the territory of Münster.
    Thus we shall have a strange summer and no mention of the long-desired peace.

416. English Ships waiting for the Peru Fleet
                            Antwerp
                            March 23, 1591
    London letters of the 7th inst. say that they have learnt from a captured despatch caravel that the fleet from new Spain and Peru will leave Havana for Spain on the last day of this month. So 70 English warships have put to sea to lie in wait for this fleet, and others are to follow daily. It is also reported that several thousand men are to be sent from England to Brittany against the Spaniards.

417. Philip raising Money on his Indian Possessions
                            Rome
                            April 15, 1591
    The tale is going round that the King of Spain has summoned a meeting of twenty-six influential persons to distribute all Indian possessions among certain individuals who are to hold them in fee. He proposes to sell the possessions partly to Spaniards, partly to Indians. His Majesty expects to receive 24 millions for this.

418. Some Ships safe, but the English have yet another Prize
                            Rome
                            April 27, 1591
                            background: Azabra, a Spanish word meaning a Cantabrian brig of from 160 to 170 tons burthen.
    It is confirmed from Spain that three azabras and the flagship have reached Seville from Peru in safety with 800,000 crowns. But it is also announced that to the south of Portugal the English have captured a ship valued at 250,000 crowns on its way from China. Moreover, they have destroyed 14 of the ships trying to sail from Spain to India. So the King is negotiating with certain traders for a loan of 200,000 crowns for the Netherlands.

419. No English to trade with the League
                            Antwerp
                            May 6, 1591
    Letters from London of the 1st inst. state that the Queen of England has issued orders that on pain of death neither her own subjects nor foreigners are to import anything from members of the League in France. The Admiral of England is said to be starting for Brittany with Colonel Norris and 7000 English soldiers, because the Queen of England refuses to have the Spaniards as neighbours.
    From Zeeland we receive news that the English warships have stopped vessels coming from Spain and Portugal and robbed them of their best merchandise, and the other ships with the rest of the property they have obliged to sail to England. All this loss falls entirely upon traders and there will be great ruin. Besides this, 17 ships from Lisbon tried to sail to Brittany with troops, munitions and other things for the League on board, but these also they carried off to England.

420. The Indian Fleet sails under convoy
                            Lyons
                            May 6, 1591
    On the 4th of April five vessels left Lisbon for India and one for Malacca. They are not taking much cash. They are escorted by eleven well-armed Netherlands ships with Portuguese and Spanish soldiers on board. But it is feared that they will be insufficient to protect the ships, and that in the coming summer the English will again worry us greatly. May the Almighty guard all from harm, bring safely in the two or three vessels due this autumn, and grant those outward bound a prosperous journey.

421. Kelly, the Alchemist, locked up
                            Prague
                            May 8, 1591
                            background: The English alchemist Edward Kelley, 1555-1595, perhaps studied at oxford, and was a pupil of the renowned alchemist John Dee. With him he went to the Imperial Court at Prague in 1583. There he enjoyed high favour with the Emperor, but was imprisoned for the first time in 1589. In 1595 he was incarcerated for the second time and lost his life in attempting to escape. He left behind his documents of scientific value.
    You will have heard something concerning the alchemist Kelley. He was recently identified and detained by a messenger at Sobieslau, a small town near Budweis, as he was hastening to Herr von Rosenberg’s. This occurred just as he was having fresh horses put to his coach outside the posting-house. He was not willing to suffer arrest. Later on His Majesty sent the Chief Constable and one of his men in one coach and the Provost-Marshal and some musketeers in another to bring Kelley into imperial jurisdiction at the castle of Pürglitz, and have him locked up there. He was not even allowed a bread knife, everything was taken away. His servants are still here under restraint. But his wife and other women are kept under arrest at home. It would appear that there is something behind all this, we do not yet know what.

422. A mysterious Frenchman at Ragusa
                            Venice
                            May 19, 1591
    A distinguished French gentleman with a suite has passed through Ragusa disguised as a monk, so as not to be recognized on the journey. But as they have with them a lot of silk costumes, golden and otherwise, it is thought that they are a Navarrese or English mission.

423. Kelley is being well looked after. Why?
                            Prague
                            May 21, 1591
    There is nothing fresh about our imprisoned English alchemist. He was rather ill, so they looked after him better. He is therefore being treated gingerly. There is evidently something odd about it all.

424. English Ships bring Corn to Venice
                            Venice
                            June 14, 1591
    Two ships have arrived here from England laden with corn. Sixteen more English grain-ships are hourly expected. They bring letters to our authorities from their Queen with very friendly offers and the promise to send as much more grain as the Venetian government desires. The Queen of England has caused the property to be restored which her raiders removed from captured Venetian vessels a few months ago. She has forbidden on pain of death any further molestation on the part of her subjects of Venetian, Florentine or Genoese vessels, and desires that they may trade freely with her subjects. So it is to be hoped that trade will improve.

425. Intercepted Letter to the Queen by her Ambassador in France
Caen
15 June 1591
                        background: Translation of a letter to the Queen of England written by her ambassador. The letter was intercepted near Mouy by the garrison of Havre. This Bishop of Èvreux was Jacques du Perron, later a Cardinal, 1556-1618.
    Sophi. See note on 8. Philip Emanuel de Lorraine, Duc de Mercœur, often also called Mercurio, 1558-1602, married Mary, Duches of Étampes, and was head of the Catholic party in Brittany, of which country he hoped to become independent Duke. He therefore summoned Spaniards into France to help against the protestants and especially Henry IV. An English landing in France was the consequence. Defeated by Henry IV, he was to have been executed, but, as he was one of the chief landowners in France, Henry IV’s mistress, Gabrielle d’Estrées, persuaded the King to marry his natural son by her, César de Vendôme, to Françoise de Lorraine, daughter of the Duke, and to grant the latter his life. The Duke entered into Imperial service, fought the Turks as Lieutenant-General and died at Nuremberg in 1602. Charles of Lorraine, Duke of Mayenne, second son of Francis of Lorraine, Duke of Guise, 1554-1611. He was leader of the troops of the Guises against the Huguenots and one of the most dangerous opponents of Henry IV. At the beginning of the reign of Henry IV he tried, in conjunction with the Spanish ambassador Mendoza, to have the Cardinal of Bourbon (Charles X) proclaimed King. When Henry IV submitted to the Catholic church he became reconciled to him.
    Louviers, a small Norman town, captured for Henry IV by the Marshal de Biron on June 6, 1591. The Leaguers strove in vain to recover it. Charles of Lorraine, fourth Duke of Guise, Prince of Dombes, Admiral of the Seas in the Levant, 1572-1640. For a while he aimed at the Crown of France, but then became a zealous adherent of Henry IV.
    Your Majesty has been informed of what happened up to the departure from Dieppe. He left me behind there with the King, Your good brother. Since this the Bishop of Rome, who supports the rebel party which fills his cooking-pot, has sent a Nuncio to the Duke of Mayenne with Bulls of excommunication against all classes, whereby the adherents of the League have grown more insolent than ever. But nevertheless this has greatly promoted the interests of our religion. For all the subjects of the King who call themselves Catholic have been urging him to declare himself a Catholic, and in order to preserve his realm he might finally have been forced, in common with his subjects, to practise idolatry and go to Mass. Without these absurd so-called Bulls of excommunication he would have faltered from the right way. The King has faithful officials in his Parliament who have issued a warrant against the Papal Nuncio. This was actually done at the instance of the Papists themselves, who bethink them, as I hope, contrary to the opinion that I had of them, that God will cause the light of His Gospel to shine in this kingdom after it has been veiled for so long by Papal witchcraft. Madame, You will see the Papacy shrivel up sooner than You ventured to hope. We are about to destroy utterly the power and influence of the Pope by the creation of a Patriarch, with which the adherents of both religions are in sympathy. This is all that we can desire. There are still some bigots among us who are thought recalcitrant, but they will be brought to reason by fair promises which Your Majesty will understand. Louviers has been taken by surprise, and the Bishop of Evreux, one of the most obstinate partisans of the League, has been sent to Tours. There the wind is not favourable to the sacerdotalists. I am working in secret to have him arraigned, for such people as he are too dangerous, and I think that justice will not spare him. As for the true Christian Church, in all ways sit is making wonderful progress in France. The King of Spain, that old foe of Your Majesty and of the Crown of France, is molesting us on his side, for he is sending quantities of money and of troops under the Duke of Parma. The King of France cannot resist these without the help which I have promised him on the behalf and by the instructions of Your Majesty. The Duc de Mercœur is awaiting him, Parma, but the Prince of Dombes will give him a fitting reception and will give our men such stout support that they will hurl their foes to earth. The Prince of Piedmont has gone to Spain with a small retinue to obtain money there, that he may make war against our comrades in Geneva. If he succeeds in this the Genevans will be supported by their neighbours. The indisposition of the King has made us anxious, but, God be thanks, he is out of danger. He has received £10,000 which were at once utilized for expenses of war and exhausted in less than a day. Cash and military stores are short here. Owing to lack of funds no auxiliaries can at present be drawn from Germany. The Duke of Saxony has shown himself very cold to God’s cause. The Venetians put us off with fair words. Enthusiasm has waned everywhere. True believers in France rest all their hopes on Your Majesty. May it please You to give Your troops orders to advance without delay. It will be no small honour to You, Madam, to have overthrown the Roman basilisk, and to have led the Gallican Church to the paths of truth. As for me I shall for ever esteem myself happy to be able to serve You as ambassador at so critical a moment. The King can get no support from the Turk, who might have sent a sufficient force into France but for the menaces of the Sophi. In this connection the Venetians have made a mistake which has delayed matters. But notwithstanding this the King is about to renew the alliance with the Turk aforesaid, because he hopes for great advantage from it. What will result I know not.
    It was feared that the rebels would set up a King, which would not have been welcome to us, but the adjournment of the Parliament which had been summoned for May leaves us free to attend to our business undisturbed for a little while longer.
    I write nothing to Your Majesty about the bearer of this letter, for I hope and feel assured that You know as well as I that he has lost no time since he has been on the continent, and that he has fully justified my expectations. He will above all give Your Majesty reasons for hastening to give Your aid.
    I implore the Creator to grant You, together with good health, a very long and very happy life.
         Given at Caen on the 15th June 1591.
            Your most devoted and most obedient
                servant and subject,
                            WALSINGHAM.
    
426. English in Brittany
London
June 24, 1591
         Is the King of Spain dead?
    We have no special news here except that the Earl of Essex is recruiting 4000 men here to take to France and serve the King of Navarre.
    The City of London is sending some 60,000 ducats to France.
    Captain Williams, an Englishman, in garrison at Dieppe with 300 soldiers, has, with the help of the Governor of Dieppe, killed about 1200 Rouen men.
    The King has taken a strong fortress near Rouen, greatly to the detriment of the Rouen people. In Brittany the English and Navarrese have captured the strong town of Guingamp after heavy bombardment and storm. Most of the nobility of Brittany had taken refuge there.
    Lord Howard, who is in Spanish waters with the Queen’s ships, is said to have taken a despatch caravel coming from Peru and another large vessel of 800 tons from Ostend with masts, ropes and so on.
    The Earl of Cumberland, who set out with 8 vessels, and is, they say, on his way to India, appears to have met 11 vessels bound for Hamburg of Portugal. He looted them and took about 25,000 ducats worth of spices, among them 400 bags of pepper. All this he loaded on two of these vessels and took with him. It is a great loss for those concerned.
    The death of the King of Spain is much talked of here.

427. The Emperor forbids his Subjects to engage as Mercenaries
                            Prague
                            June 30, 1591
    His Imperial and Roman Majesty has, on request from the Spanish ambassador, issued fresh orders in all hereditary territories of His Majesty sternly forbidding any one of whatever rank to enter foreign service. Those who have entered service abroad must leave it at once and go home. The penalty is confiscation of all fiefs, and of property and possessions. Nothing particular has happened about our English alchemist. He is still behind stone walls, and his brother and servant and their wives are still detained in their residences and in rather poor circumstances.

428. The Turks will not move this year
                            Venice
                            July 21, 1591
    They write from Constantinople on May 10 that there is no sign of any galleys putting out, and the conjecture is that nothing will happen this year, for the Grand Turk will not grant money for an expedition of the kind from his own Treasury, but prefers to get it from other peoples’ purses. The Navarrese and English envoys have arrived at Constantinople with their presents, but they have not brought money enough to get a fleet fitted out, so it may be assumed that they will be unable to carry their point. But if they have reckoned on doing so they will find they are wrong, simply because the prolonged war with Persia attracts all the thought and attention of the Turks. They are assembling many men against Persia, and it is said that owing to lack of pay the Turkish troops are going over to the Persians.

429. English Defeat in the Straits of Gibraltar
                            Rome
                            July 24, 1591
    Last Wednesday the ordinary messenger arrived with some rather old letters from the Spanish Court. They mention that twenty English vessels, on their way with vast quantities of looted merchandise, were caught by the galleys in the Straits of Gibraltar. The royal fleet of many sail has gone to Brittany from the ports of Biscay. The Spaniards want to place as many troops as they possibly can in this province in order to get control of the seaboard towns. They think they can then easily hold them and make expeditions from there against England.

430. The English after the Fleet from New Spain
Middelburg
August 1, 1591
background: Robert Devereux, second Earl of Essex, 1567-1601, the well-known favourite of Elizabeth. He lost his father early and was left in poor circumstances. At the age of ten he appeared at Court. His mother married the Earl of Leicester, and he went with him to Holland and took part in the fighting there. In 1587 he distinguished himself greatly in Drake’s Spanish expedition. He married the widow of Sir Philip Sidney. When Henry IV asked Elizabeth for help against the League, he was sent by the Queen to France and received a command there. Subsequently, on the suggestion of Sir Francis Bacon, his attention was given to foreign affairs. He discovered the plot of Doctor Lopez to poison Elizabeth. In 1596 he went with a fleet against Spain and fought there under Lord Howard of Effingham. In 1597 his expedition with Raleigh against Spain and the Azores failed, and he fell into disfavour with the Queen for a time, but was appointed Earl Marshal. In 1598 during a political discussion Elizabeth boxed his ears, but he was reconciled to the Queen by his uncle Sir William Knollys. In 1599 he became Governor General of Ireland and was at first successful, although later on he met with one reverse after another. Accordingly he concluded an armistice with the rebels and returned unexpectedly to London, where the Queen had him arrested. In 1600 he was tried and acquitted, but he strove in vain to regain the Queen’s favour. In this affair Bacon played a part which was strange rather then creditable. From this moment all malcontents gathered round Essex, who hatched a formidable conspiracy against the Queen. He was imprisoned and brought before a Court of his Peers, accused of conspiracy against the Queen, and condemned to death. Elizabeth was reluctant to ratify the sentence, but he was executed on the 24th February 1601.
         Essex ready to start                
    Letters from London of the 28th July announce that the Earl of Essex is ready to start and is due to reach Dieppe before the end of the month with 4000 foot and 200 horse. A conspiracy of courtiers against the Queen has been discovered. They are alleged to have intended to poison her. The accused have escaped and might well have lost their heads. The Spanish fleet has not turned up yet, for some of the English came upon two ships which had lost their way. They carried several thousand hides and some gold and silver. As it was not known where the other fleet was, vessels were sent from England to the Azores with provisions to meet the English ships there.
    Two distinguished noblemen are said to have gone to the market in London in broad daylight and to have cried out there with a loud voice: “Woe, Woe, Woe!”  Then they spoke to the people and told them to repent, for the Day of Judgment was at hand. One is said bitterly to have attacked the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Lord Chancellor. At this people wondered greatly and at length they were arrested, in order that they might be questioned as to why they did this. They answered they had heard Christ, who commanded them to do it. Others too should hear Him and do penance. The whole thing seems strange, and it appears as though God would now sit in judgment on these evil men. May the merciful God have pity upon us!

431. Essex ready to start
                            Antwerp
                            August 3, 1591
    Zeeland announces that letters from London of the 28th ult. state that the Earl of Essex is ready to embark. As for the conspiracy, some of Her Majesty’s courtiers are involved. The design was to poison the Queen and Don Antonio of Portugal. The accomplices were caught escaping, and two have already been quartered. The heads have been stuck up on poles on the bridge, by the side of those of forty others implicated in earlier plots against the Queen.
    The Earl of Cumberland has gone to Peru with 70 sail.

432. The English Ambassador urges the Turks to act
                            Constantinople
                            October 16, 1591
                            background: Ciccala, originally Scipione Visconte Ciccala, Capudan Pasha of the Turkish fleet, Grand Admiral and one of the most dreaded freebooters of the Mediterranean, was one of the numerous renegades in Turkish service. He was born at Messina and was alleged to have been captured by the Turks in 1561 at the age of twelve. His career in Turkey was brilliant, and he became an Admiral and a General against the Emperor, whose forces he defeated at Cerestes in 1596.
    The English envoy here has been informing the Sultan orally and in writing that the Pope and the King of Spain and their supporters are striving to set up a King of their own choice in France, in order with his help later on to attack the Sultan and the Queen of England with all their forces by land and by sea. With this in view the Queen seems to be stirring up the Poles and Muscovites also, and to have entered into an alliance with the King of Navarre, the Swede, Denmark, the German protestant Princes, the Prince of Florence and the Venetians to thwart the enemies of the Sultan. Therefore the Englishman, in the name of his Queen and of the King of Navarre, requests the Sultan, in accordance with his promise, to send help and not to lose the present favourable opportunity. Upon this the Sultan is said to have conversed with Ciccala in his new pavilion for two hours and to have decided to send the desired help to the King of Navarre. He is stated also to have commanded Ciccala to select a reliable person through whom the Sultan’s decision could be conveyed by autograph letter to the King of Navarre. Again much is said here about 300 galleys or more, but it is seen plainly and is the opinion of those who know that, even if the Sultan did not shrink from the expense, it would be impossible to fit out more than a hundred galleys. It is said, too, that Ciccala is content and promises the Sultan that this number will suffice. He means to sail with 100 galleys from here and 50 from Barbary and the Archipelago. They believe that this number will be sent by the Sultan to the assistance of the King of Navarre. But should the Spanish ambassador arrive with the much talked of thousands of Spanish crowns, a great change of plans will at once be made.

433. The Spanish Fleet gets through
                            Middelburg
                            October 17, 1591
    This week we have twice received letters from London to the effect that the English raiders are gradually coming home, bringing much loot with them. The fleet from New Spain is said to have reached Seville and to have fought its way through the English fleet. In the engagement two of the Queen’s ships have been lost and many others damaged. There is nothing in the tale about the Brazilian ships which they are alleged to have captured. This is good news which will cheer up the merchants here, after all the losses they have suffered. The Spaniards have recently taken seven English ships with fairly valuable cargoes.

434. But it has lost heavily and spices will be dear
                            Lisbon
                            October 19, 1591
    God be praised!  Perhaps before receiving this letter you will have heard by special messenger of what has happened to our Armada and the fleet from New Spain, which wintered in Havana. On the 8th inst. some of these ships, both from the Armada and from the fleet, and on the next day some more, came in here damaged and badly knocked about. General Don Alonzo de Basan came in likewise. Some of them are still missing, but perhaps have shaped a course for other ports. Of the Havana fleet 30 ships are still missing, but 18 have come in here and 30 to Seville. But altogether 70 ships left Havana. Our Armada had a collision with some English ships, but they soon took to flight. The Captain’s ship escaped badly mauled, though it is thought she sank afterwards. The flagship, one of the Queen’s best vessels, of some 60 guns, was surrounded and fired at all night till she surrendered the next day. But our ships hit each other too and two of them were sunk. However, the crew of one was saved. Immediately afterwards the fleet from New Spain came up. Of this 13 ships were already missing, and if our Armada had not cleared the English out of their way they would have had a very bad time. They intended to sail to Lisbon in company, but from the 26th to 29th September they met with such unprecedentedly bad weather that all the ships were separated. Some ran to Isola Terzera and San Miguel, and in sight of Terzera II ships were wrecked, among them the English ship, out of which, however, the guns had previously been taken. They have survived very great dangers, and it is hoped that some ships may yet have got to safety at San Miguel, or that the Armada has gone to Corunna. We cannot yet estimate the loss. The Havana fleet is not yet unloaded, and we must await the report of the casa de contractation in Seville. Altogether 14,000 arobas of cochineal seem to have been shipped. Nothing is known about ginger, as so many vessels have been lost. All the silver and gold for the King and the merchants has remained at Havana. The English captured some vessels close in here after they had weathered the storm, but their best haul was made between Santo Domingo and Havana. There they took a ship with a lot of silver on board, some say less than 500, others more than 700,000 reals. This will ill suit the people at Seville after the heavy losses they have been suffering for some years. It had been hoped that by means of the Armada the spices from Malacca which had been loaded up in 1589 would be saved and brought here. But the stuff has been left in the Azores. Those interested now want to bring it here in caravels, but as winter is at hand this cannot be done before next year. If no ship comes in from India till then, spices will get dearer every day. Cloves cannot now be got for 5000, but if the galleon comes from St. Thomas the price might fall again.

435. More Appeals to the Turks
                            Venice
                            October 26, 1591
    The English envoy is applying in the name of his Queen for the despatch of a big fleet next spring from Constantinople. The Turks have given the Englishman and the King of Navarre flattering promises, but it is assumed that little will be performed, if those who are concerned do not dip deep into their pockets; and then it will be very expensive.

436. A Lampoon on the Prince of Parma
                            Antwerp
                            November 9, 1591
    A pasquinade against the Duke of Parma was posted up on Change the night before last. Its purport is that His Highness is a traitor to the country and is seeking by all means to destroy it. His Highness is also in league with the Queen of England, to marry one of his sons to a cousin of the Queen so as to be able later with more ease to conquer the kingdom of Portugal. There are several other such accusations in the lampoon. Also there is a picture of His Highness. It is an evil affair which might cause disorder in the town, so the authorities have announced that the person who gives up the author of the lampoon to them will receive £100 Flemish, and any one who knows the author and does not give him up will be severely punished.

437. Outrage on a Spanish Envoy in England
                            Cologne
                            December 10, 1591
    From Holland we hear that the King of Spain has sent an envoy to the King of Scots. At his own desire this envoy was sent on by the King to the Queen of England, but he was beheaded in England, then his corpse was dragged through the streets and cut into four pieces. Upon this the Queen of England has declared the King of Spain to be her foe on water and on land, and has taken and confiscated some vessels which were going with grain to Spain from Amsterdam and the Baltic. So it seems that the war with Spain is beginning again and that there will be no end of trouble.

438. Perez and Saragossa
                            Rome
                            December 14, 1591
    Through the messenger from Spain who arrived on Tuesday we learn that the inhabitants of Saragossa have admitted Don Alonzo de Vargas and his troops into the town. With the exception of a few ringleaders the inhabitants have all obtained pardon. But it is not known where Secretary Perez, on whose account the whole rising has taken place, has escaped to.
    Juan de Vargas was brought to the Netherlands by Alva in 1567 and made President of the Spanish Court of Inquisition.
    For participating in the rising which took place at Saragossa because of the arrest of Antonio Perez the following were executed:  Juan de Luna, Don Diego de Heredia, Francisco de Ayerbe, Dionysio Perez, and Antonio de Fuerdes. Antonio Perez escaped, but his effigy was publicly burnt.

439. About half the Spanish Fleet is lost
                            Antwerp
                            December 14, 1591
    According to one letter from Seville about the Indian fleet only 34 ships have arrived there and 44 have either been lost or been captured by the English. Others again hear that 40 ships have come in and 40 are lost. However this may be, it is a very heavy loss which, both in Seville and in other places, will cause great confusion among traders; moreover, serious failures are to be feared.

440. Ships reach England safely
                            Antwerp
                            January 5, 1592
                            background: Thomas Cavendish (Candis), 1560 (?)-1592, a well-known freebooter and the second Englishman to sail round the world. He died on one of his voyages and was buried at sea.
    News comes from England that on the last day of December three vessels arrived in England with dried fish and wine. The ship Patty came from Candia to England in 56 days with 500 barrels of muscatel wine. Fifty-six barrels of Canary on a ship were taken by the English corsairs and brought to the west coast, but as they were incautious with a candle a spark flew into the powder and so 17 men were lost with everything on board. The English letters add that Lord Cumberland and another are arming in order to sail in five or six weeks. They say Captain Candis has been at sea for nine months and nobody knows anything about him.

441. More Raiding at Sea
                            Middelburg
                            January 16, 1592
    Some vessels have come over from England with cloth and other goods and many traders and passengers besides. They relate that the English took 7 ships of the Indian fleet, but most of it—40 ships—was lost in the storm. They say also that a well-known English nobleman has set sail with 5 armed ships and 800 men with the intention of visiting India and not returning home without considerable booty. Others are to follow in the spring. So the Indian vessels will suffer again. A few days ago 7 corn ships were lost in a storm and the crew of one of them was saved. Sea voyages are now very dangerous.

442. The Turks are inactive
                            Venice
                            January 17, 1592
    They say that the Turk has sold most of his stores of biscuit again. This is a token that o powerful fleet will sail. But at the same time he seems to have put a veto on further export of grain from his dominions.

443. No English Money left for France
                            Middelburg
                            January 24, 1592
    They write from England that a French envoy has again arrived with a fresh request for troops and money, but this will probably be almost entirely refused, as the Queen’s Treasury is sufficiently exhausted.

444. A Spanish Envoy for Constantinople
                            Venice
                            February 7, 1592
    Constantinople letters announce that the Secretary of the Spanish envoy, who is to go to Constantinople and conclude peace with the Turks, has obtained the required passport for his master, although the English ambassador tried hard to prevent it.

445. Financial Expedients in Turkey
                            Venice
                            February 7, 1592
                            background: The Turkish word chouse used to mean herald. In modern use it signifies non-commissioned officer.
    They write from Constantinople on January 4 that the Grand Turk summoned Captain Ciccala and asked him how many galleys he could get ready to sail this year. Ciccala answered that 200 could be got ready if they worked fast and hard, but the Grand Turk was not satisfied and was very insistent that he could not manage with less than 300. Ciccala replied that if His Majesty required so large a navy he must give him time and provide him with the necessary money. But as the Grand Turk does not desire to furnish this money from his Treasury he has issued orders for the creation of 1000 new Chouses, each one of whom is to pay 1000 ducats for the post. This money is to be employed for the new navy.

446. Attempt to murder James VI
                            Antwerp
                            February 8, 1592
    On the 5th inst. some London merchants came here by water through Zeeland, having left London on the 2nd. They report that before their departure news had reached London from Scotland that a Scotch Colonel by name Stuart, who was long in the service of the Holland and Zeeland governments, but from disloyalty to them joined the Catholic side, broke into the King of Scots’ palace with a large number of men intending to kill the King. But the King fled from one room to another till his guards and the people came to his aid. They killed some of the conspirators and took other prisoner. But there are those who think this was done with the connivance and consent of the King of Scots.

447. Escape of Bothwell
                            Antwerp
                            February 15, 1592
    English letters from London confirm that the Scotch Earl Bothwell with 50 troopers surprised the King in his palace. But the King escaped into his chamber. When the news spread in Edinburgh, armed citizens went to the castle, caught Bothwell and his accomplices, and hanged 14 of them. Bothwell, however, escaped, but is being closely pursued.

448. Sale of Turkish Sailors by a French Captain
                            Constantinople
                            March 21, 1592
    A few days ago some Turkish merchants arrived from different parts of their dominions. They relate that about a year and a half since a French yacht landed at Chios, as the Captain announced that he wished to proceed to Rhodes and thence to Alexandria. He took on Turkish sailors and they accompanied him. But when he was on the high sea he sailed to Messina, sold the Turks there and divided the profits among his own men. Ever since the Turks have been trying to get compensation for their loss, and applied in the first place to the French envoy. He referred the matter to the English envoy, who said he was here on behalf of his Queen only, and had nothing to do with French affairs. So the Turks are to bring up their complaint before the Divan in the next few days.

449. English Troops for the Low Countries
                            Middelburg
                            April 2, 1592
    This morning the English here announce that the Netherlands authorities have raised 26 companies of mercenaries for three months at their own expense. They are very well armed. The English have sent them 3000 soldiers all dressed in uniform. The Queen has presented each man with £1 above his ordinary pay. So it seems that both parties are striving for victory. To the King of Navarre these auxiliaries will be most welcome. Two thousand soldiers are being sent to Brittany from Dover and other places. It seems too that the King of Spain is making fresh preparations for the summer. The Earl of Cumberland has already brought in some loot. Another Lord is to sail shortly for the Indies and islands with 10 ships, but Drake may only raid as far as Lisbon, as Her Majesty will not   MISSING PAGES 238 & 239

457. Details of Ships captured
                            London
                            September 23, 1592
    Among the five vessels coming from Calicut the English have taken the Captain’s ship, on board of which were the Viceroy and his suite. The ship is of 1500 to 1600 tons and was taken near the Azores. This news was brought here about twelve days ago by a pinnace. She had left the ships behind, as they were putting the troops ashore and taking on fresh water. But they have not yet got their prize to England. In order to bring in the loot safely several ships have been sent to meet them, as there are 50 small Spanish vessels along the French coast. Of these five Calicut ships one has arrived, one is burnt, one captured, the fourth they say is lost, but the fifth is most anxiously expected.

458. More Details
                            Antwerp
                            October 3, 1592
                            background: Corvo is an island in the Azores.
    News reaches Zeeland from England that the Captain’s ship from Calicut has been brought in there. The English fought this ship for some hours and ended by agreeing to put the Viceroy, nobles and other passengers and the crew ashore on the island of Corvo. The English then sailed off with ships and cargo. Whether they have caught the other ship they were chasing as well, we shall learn later.

459. The Dutch may be annoyed
                            Antwerp
                            October 3, 1592
    They write from Zeeland that the English have taken three ships bound with mixed cargoes from Calicut to Holland, Zeeland and Hamburg. This will make bad blood between Holland, Zeeland, and England. The Queen of England will be requested to return ships and cargoes, but in the meanwhile much of the property will have been stolen and this will cause great loss to traders, as these three ships are valued at 300,000 ducats.

460. The Santa Maria at Portsmouth
                            Middelburg
                            October 9, 1592
    The English have brought the great Indian ship Santa Maria into Portssmouth. The warships have stolen half her cargo and have tried hard to sell the spices in all quarters, though they are forbidden to do so. But forbidding is no use, for Her Majesty and others cannot reduce the sailors to obedience. Most of the valuables on this ship will be lost. There were no pearls on board. They brought no Portuguese to England, so as to be able to pillage easier. They also burnt all bills of lading and ship’s papers. Pepper, cinnamon, cloves and indigo form the bulk of the cargo, but especially pepper, 8000 cwt. The English warships are mostly at home. They have taken another three ships which defended themselves. These also were pillaged.
    In England the plague is still raging. The Court and others of importance have left London for the country.



461. Distribution of Booty
                            Antwerp
                            October 10, 1592
    The Portuguese here have letters from London of the 26th ult. informing them that the Captain’s ship from Calicut has been brought to London and that cloves to the value of £6000 have already been sold off her. But the Queen has caused the sale of merchandise from this ship to be suspended in order that she may settle the price at which goods are to be sold, so as to obtain a higher rate. What arrangements have been made about the other two ships from Calicut is unknown.

462. Cargoes of the Santa Maria and Madre de Dios
                            Antwerp
                            October 11, 1592
                            background: The great ship Madre de Dios was taken by Sir John Burgh, 1562-1593. Flores is one of the Azores.
    Letters of the 9th inst. from Middelburg report that the English have again brought in 4 ships to England, one of which from Brazil is laden with sugar, one from St. Thomas with hides, and the other two, bound for the Spanish mines, with 1600 barrels of quicksilver. All this is valued at over 60,000 crowns. At Middelburg are 27 companies of English soldiers, waiting for the first favourable wind to sail to Brittany.
    The English are said to have brought a Calicut ship into Portsmouth and to have taken off her some 200 barrels. In these barrels were quantities of pearls and jewels, and gold in bullion. They have also got a large amount of spices, such as 4500 cwt. of pepper, cinnamon, nutmegs, mace and cloves. This alone would amount to over £200,000. The English have fought a good deal over the loot.
    London letters of the 2nd inst. state that the Calicut ship brought into Portsmouth by the English is named the Madre de Dios and is of 1500 tons with 36 brass guns. There were 90 sailors and numerous passengers on board. The value was far above a million, as the spices among the cargo had been valued at a million, and there were also on board gold costumes, a lot of Calicut linen and much Chinese silk. At first she fought with two English ships only, but when nine English ships with Lord Cumberland came up the Calicut ship had to surrender. Two hundred lives are said to have been lost on each side. The lesser people were put ashore on the island of Flores, and only sixteen of the most important were brought to England. The other ship which was burnt off the Azores was named the Santa Cruz.

463. The Queen requires the Booty to be returned
                            Antwerp
                            October 13, 1592
    London letters of the 10th inst. report that the Queen has given strict orders on pain of severe punishment for the return of all property off the Calicut ship brought into England. What has already been sold must be reported at Court and paid for. It is hoped that by this means the jewels and other valuables will reappear. It is thought also that the price of pepper will not come down, especially as the pepper on the Santa Cruz was lost.

464. 198 Deaths of Plague in London this week
                            Antwerp
                            October 18, 1592
    Letters from Middelburg report that the English soldiers were still there on the 16th inst. The departure of Colonel Norris with 8200 English soldiers for Brittany is to take place on the first fair wind.
    Last week 198 people died of the plague in London.

465. The Queen will soon be dead
                            Rome
                            November 7, 1592
    The report is circulating here that the Queen of England, owing to a suppurating fistula, cannot live beyond Easter.

466. Capture of Honduras and fourteen Peru Ships
                            Antwerp
                            November 8, 1592
    The latest letters from England report that the English have surprised and plundered the town of Honduras in Mexico, carrying off immense wealth. By special mail comes the announcement from London that the English are alleged to have taken 14 ships coming from Peru.

467. Spanish Fleets to stay in Harbour for the Winter
                            Lyons
                            November 12, 1592
    Letters from Madrid of the 26th ult. have just this moment come, and announce that King Philip has fallen ill of gout and has therefore not gone to Tarragona. His fleet, which was lying at the Azores, has returned to Lisbon, and the 2000 soldiers on board have been sent to Brittany. His Majesty has ordered the fleets due from Peru and New Spain to stay behind and winter there, so no fresh fleet is to be expected before next spring. Therefore the English will go still farther off to lie in wait for this fleet. They have snapped up and carried off another two ships bound from Seville to New Spain. They are valued at 200,000 crowns.

468. Execution of Saragossa Ringleaders
                            Rome
                            November 14, 1592
    The announcement comes from Spain that the chief ringleaders who took part in the revolt at Saragossa have died the death. Their entire property has been confiscated. The Secretary, Antonio Perez, on whose account the rising took place, is supposed now to be at Constantinople.

469. Probable Glut of Pepper
                            Middelburg
                            November 18, 1592
    Our only news here is that the two East Indian caravels taken by the English have been brought into Plymouth. Their value is estimated at above £200,000. The Viceroy with his whole family and all his fortune is on board. Ships still at sea are in the utmost danger, so that numerous Portuguese must be ruined, for far too many of their Brazilian ships have been taken. Very much pepper seems to have been on board and this will not suit the traders, as they already have 6000 cwt. stored in Amsterdam.

470. Philip has lost 4,000,000 at Sea this year
                            Middelburg
                            November 19, 1592
    Letters from London of the 17th inst. confirm that two ships from Spain to Peru with quicksilver have been taken by the English. It is said that the losses of the King of Spain at sea this year could not be paid for with four millions.

471. Funeral of the Duke of Parma
                            Antwerp
                            December 12, 1592
    The dead body of the Duke of Parma was brought with great pomp and solemnity from Arras to Brussels on the 10th inst. The soldiers and fraternities, all the clergy, Counts von Mansfeld, Arenberg, Barlaimont and de Fuentes, all the rest of the nobility and the members of the council moved out to meet the corpse with lighted lanterns in their hands. They escorted it to the castle chapel. We shall presumably hear soon what orders Fuentes has from the King, and whether Mansfeld retains the government provisionally till further orders from his Sacred Majesty. It is said that the Duchess of Savoy will be appointed Regent and Fuentes Captain-General of the army.

470. The Englishman, the Frenchman, and the Grand Vizier
                            Constantinople
                            January 27, 1593
                            background: François Savary, Comte de Brèves, 1560-1628, a well-known French diplomatist, who was made French ambassador to Constantinople in 1591 and used his great influence there to stir up the Sultan against the League, and succeeded in concluding a treaty between Turkey and Henry IV. He travelled all over the East. After the death of Henry IV he enjoyed the complete confidence of Marie de Médicis. He was nephew of the previously mentioned French ambassador Savary de Lanscomes, whom he had accompanied on his journey to Constantinople.
    The Englishman, who has hitherto been only an Agent, was lately appointed permanent Envoy by letters from his Queen, but without any presents for the Sultan. He declares that the vessel they were on was captured in company with several others by the Spaniards near the Straits of Gibraltar. This appears somewhat doubtful to people here, for the Englishman has used this excuse often before. But it is confidently maintained by others that twelve English galleons were taken by the Spaniards in the Straits of Gibraltar.
    Monsieur de Brève has long been struggling to get Monsieur de Lanscomes into his power, as he wanted to send the envoy to the King of Navarre. However, he had to await the return of Ciccala. Since this he has again taken a deal of trouble, and, to enhance his reputation, has spread abroad that Navarre is already King elect of France and has Paris and the whole country in his power. Moreover, his envoy has announced that he has reliable informants here from Christian countries. Thus finally on a report from the Hoja and from Ciccala, which has convinced the Grand Vizier too, an order has been issued by the Sultan that Lanscomes is to be taken out of the Black Tower and handed over to the Englishman, together with a despatch from the Sultan to Navarre. This happened sure enough on December 31. Immediately there appeared in front of the Englishman’s house a little unarmed boat with a single rower, and another boat somewhat bigger. The Frenchman did not want to embark, so he was tied with cords like a bale of goods and then hoisted with ropes and lowered into the boat and packed in. He implored the Englishman loudly and fervently to be sent away with his servants in the larger boat. He offered to pledge his honour and his faith, to take a personal oath, to leave his nephew and elder son behind as hostages that he would present himself before the King of Navarre. But the Englishman would have none of this, on the pretext that he had serious scruples against it, as Navarre had been declared a heretic, and he could not take the responsibility himself but must submit the matter to the Venetian Bailo. What negotiations took place in the affair is not known. All the same Lanscomes was despatched from here in the manner indicated, and his three sons, who remained together with their mother, for whose company on the journey he had begged with especial fervour, were detained here. His personal effects were subsequently transferred by his nephew to Brèves.
    The latter declares that 200,000 crowns will come to him shortly from the King of Navarre. But this is gravely doubted. He might, however, soon become Navarre’s French envoy here.
    So this is the dish which these three gentlemen, the Englishman, the Frenchman and the Grand Vizier, combined to concoct at their most recent consultations on the 13th December.

473. An Escort for the Spanish Fleet
                            Venice
                            February 12, 1593
                            backgound: Sir Martin Frobisher, 1535-1594, a renowned English sailor, who specially devoted himself to the discovery of the North-West passage. He visited Greenland repeatedly, and was despatched to Ireland as a Captain in Royal service against the Spaniards who had landed there. In the fight against the Armada he did exceptionally well, and was therefore knighted. In 1594 he took part in the relief of Brest under Sir John Norris. In this affair he received a mortal wound.
    The King of Spain has allowed the Portuguese to fit out ships to go and meet the Indian fleet. At Lisbon 12 galleons and other ships are being fitted out. They had been confined to these harbours because it had become known in Spain that the English pirate Drake, with Frobisher and other great corsairs and many ships, had sailed from England for Havana to pillage the fleet.

474. Drake preparing to start again
                            Antwerp
                            February 15, 1593
    English letters of the 23rd ult., which come to us from Zeeland, report that a Scotch Earl tried to make war on the King of Scots at sea, hoping to get much assistance from Spain. But as it did not come he gave up his attempt.
    The men of Dunkirk have been at sea with some well-found ships and have intercepted several vessels trying to pass between London and Zeeland laden with corn, wine and sugar.
    It was recently intended to send 2000 English pikemen and 800 musketeers from England to Brittany.
    Parliament is to sit in England within the next three weeks.
    Captain Drake is said to be intending to sail with six warships, and the Adventurers with 30 vessels.

475. More English Corn for Venice
                            Venice
                            March 5, 1593
    This week again an English vessel has come in here with 1000 cwt. of corn; others are to follow it every day.

476. Distribution of Booty
                            Antwerp
                            March 5, 1593
    Letters from London report merely that the meeting of parliament has been postponed till the month of March.
    The distribution of property carried in the Indian caravel just brought in is said to have been effected. Everything has not yet been sold but remains temporarily in the warehouses, because the sailors demand for themselves a quarter of the pepper and the Italians a sixth.
    The rising in the kingdom of Scotland has been quelled.
    Two thousand five hundred soldiers are again to be sent to France from England.

477. French Gifts for the Sultan
                            Constantinople
                            April 8, 1593
    Monsieur de Brèves announces that he is expecting a secretary and some other persons from Ragusa by land with presents for the Sultan. Then he is to be accredited here as Navarrese French Envoy.
    The Englishman has again been saying at the top of his voice that the boasted ship from his Queen is now at last due; it is already quite near; but now once more there is silence.

478. Plague still in London
                            Antwerp
                            May 2, 1593
    English letters of the 24th ult. state that the plague has not yet died out in London. This week 34 people have died of it.
    Parliament is prorogued and has consented to grant the Queen five millions in four years.
    Many warships with Adventurers have again put out, so that the sea will be very unsafe.

479. Spanish Success on the Garoone
                            Lyons
                            June 16, 1593
    Letters of the 22nd May from Madrid state that 12 ships from Biscay sailed up the river near Bordeaux, a town in France, to support a fortress there called Blois (presumably Blaze is meant) occupied by the Leaguers. On their entry into the river the Spaniards came upon six English warships which were strongly armed. They fought and cannonaded each other, and after the Spaniards had captured the flagship and the Captain’s ship, the two most important vessels, the English saw that they were done for. They set fire to their ships and burnt themselves. Of the Spanish ships two were lost but the crews were saved. The fortress mentioned above was reinforced and the Spanish ships returned home.
    Lisbon letters of the 15th May report that 40 ships have reached the Azores from India. They have twelve millions in gold, silver, precious stones and other valuables on board. Although the English raiders were on the look-out in force, the King of Spain has sent eight galleys, and two other big ships with 1200 soldiers and munitions for four months, to meet them and convoy this wealth safely home. Within a fortnight three more galleys and five other ships are to sail out in order to make the sea safe from the English.

480. English Envoy before the Emperor
                            Prague
                            July 13, 1593
    The English envoy had an audience with his Imperial Majesty last week at which he vindicated his Queen to His Imperial and Roman Majesty, inasmuch as injustice was being done her by the accusation that she was egging on the Turk against His Majesty.

481. 149 Deaths of the Plague in London last week
                            Cologne
                            July 23, 1593
    It is announced from London on the 17th inst. that 149 people died of the plague that week. It is feared it may spread further. The crops promise excellently, but notwithstanding this the load of corn has risen in price from £9 to £11 1/2, because cereals are very dear in Spain and Portugal.

482. The English Envoy leaves the Emperor
                            Prague
                            August 3, 1593
    The English envoy paid his farewell visit last Wednesday. His Imperial and Roman Majesty presented him with a gold chain worth 300 crowns, and he left for England the very next day, Thursday.

483. 454 Deaths of the Plague in London in a week
                            Antwerp
                            August 15, 1593
    Letters of the 2nd from London report that this Queen has again sent 2000 soldiers to Brittany. Two vessels sailing from England with corn have been taken by the Spaniards. On the other hand, the English have taken three ships with sugar bound from Brussels to Portugal. They had over 2200 cases of sugar on board. There are still more than 100 English ships at sea searching for loot.
    London letters of the 19th July record that during that week there had been 666 deaths in the city, of which 454 were from plague. Many people are leaving town in consequence and going to their country seats.

484. 220 English Fugitives at Middelburg.
                            Antwerp
                            August 22, 1593
    Zeeland letters dated iddelburg 19th inst. say that, owing to the great mortality in London, 220 people from that city have taken refuge there, and that English fugitives are arriving at other places also.
    As the King of Navarre has turned Papist and concluded an armistice for three months, the Queen of England is going to recall all her troops from France.

485. Sinan Pasha takes 140,000 Men to Hungary
                            Venice
                            August 20, 1593
    Letters from Constantinople of the 22nd ult. announce that Sinan Pasha marched out on the 19th ult. with 40,000 effectives, among them 15,000 janissaries. The Turkish Emperor in person, with his whole Court, accompanied him half a mile on his way. Sinan has orders to proceed to Hungary and Croatia to avenge the most recent defeat. On the way he is to be joined by another 100,000 men. Although the Venetian Bailo and the English envoy have exerted themselves to the uttermost to prevent this campaign, they met with no attention from Soliman, who is determined not to make peace with the Roman Emperor. Sinan pasha is said to be taking with him as prisoners the Imperial envoy, Herr von Kreckwitz, and his suite. However some assert that he has been released from custody but ordered to remove himself from Court at once and to leave the Ottoman dominions.
    Bailo or Baylo, Consul General and diplomatic representative of the Venetian Republic at Constantinople.
    Friedrich von Kreckwitz, Imperial ambassador at Constantinople. After the defeat of the Turks at Sissek in 1593 he was kept prisoner in the Seven Towers by order of Sinan Pasha, the Grand Vizier. At the beginning of the Turkish war against the Emperor he was led in chains behind the Turkish army and died in a dungeon at Belgrade early in December 1596.

486. Henry IV will do his best against Spain
                            Antwerp
                            September 12, 1593
    They write on the 9th inst. from the Hague that the Navarrese envoy has announced there and also to the Queen of England that now as before the King may be expected to spare no effort. He has received assurances to the same effect from the States General and the Queen of England, and supplies of munitions and military equipment will continue to be sent to France to drive the Spaniards out of the King’s dominions.

487. About 1000 Deaths of Plague in London weekly
                            Antwerp
                            September 25, 1593
    Letters of the 10th from London announce that there are about a thousand deaths of plague weekly in the city and outside it some five hundred, and there is no sign of any end to the mortality.
    The Queen intends to send about £30,000 for the English troops in Brittany. She also proposes to send one of her chief Councillors, Lord Buckhurst, to the King of Navarre with the information that she means to maintain the alliance. The Vidam de Chartres, who is still staying in England on behalf of the King of Navarre, may leave any day for Germany to visit the Protestant Princes.

488. The Plague abating
                            Antwerp
                            November 7, 1593
    From London in England we hear that the plague has somewhat abated. As corn prices have risen by one-third, further export is forbidden.
    Many Adventurers are now returning from the high seas with their vessels. They have accomplished little. Ships arriving in London from Spain with salt and wine report that the Adelantado has taken some Holland vessels.

489. Discovery of Copper in India
                            Venice
                            November 12, 1593
    Lisbon letters of the 2nd ult. report that the Portuguese have recently discovered an island in East India which is very rich in mines of copper and other metals. The ore contains up to two-thirds silver. This island is, however, so unhealthy that it is hardly possible to keep alive there for a year. They say the English tried to occupy the island, but it was so strongly held by the Portuguese that they had their journey for nothing.

490. 420 Deaths of Plague in London the first week in November
                            Antwerp
                            November 23, 1593
    English letters of the 9th inst. from London record that the sister of the King of Navarre is expected there. It is said that she has already started thither from Dieppe, but what she is after nobody knows.
    There were 420 deaths of the plague in London that week, and this is still a large number.
    Henry IV’s sister was Catherine de bourbon, 1558-1604, married in 1599 to Duke Henry of Lorraine, d. 1624.

491. Jesuit Conspiracy in England
                            Antwerp
                            January 8, 1594
    News comes from England of a fresh conspiracy to set up a King in England. Four Jesuits seem to have persuaded a young Earl of the Reformed religion by name Derby that the Pope had chosen him to be King of England. The Pope was minded to confirm him as King and send him a consecrated crown. The Jesuits thought that by means of a rising they could make this gentleman King. But the plot was discovered in time and the Earl and the four Jesuits, as well as the man who brought over the crown, were arrested. But nobody was executed and quartered except the person who brought the crown. The four Jesuits were respited because they abandoned their religion and turned Calvinist. The Earl, however, is still in prison, and we shall hear what happens to him.
    Ferdinand Stanley, fifth Earl of Derby, 1559-1594, a friend and patron of many poets and somewhat of a poet himself. From 1589 till 1594 he was patron of the company of actors formerly maintained by Leicester. He succeeded to his father’s dignities on the death of the latter, for instance as Lord of Man and the Isles. English Catholics residing on the continent tried to involve him in a conspiracy based on his claims to the throne through his mother, and sent Richard Hesketh and Holt the Jesuit to him. They promised him help from Spain. However Stanley handed Hesketh over to the authorities, so that he was executed at St. Albans in 1593.

492. Spaniards in Brittany
                            Antwerp
                            January 29, 1594
    They write from Zeeland that 5000 Spanish soldiers are said to have arrived in Brittany. They have stationed two galleys in the river before Bordeaux. The Queen of England cannot afford much assistance because of the rising which has taken place in Scotland, and it is possible that the Spaniards mean to retain the whole of Brittany. It is also announced that the King of Scots has turned Catholic and is depending on the Catholic party still left in the country. The King is also said to have had his cousin, the Earl of Bothwell, and several other Earls and gentlemen of the Reformed religion, killed. There is, therefore, great disquiet in the country, and the Queen has sent an Envoy to the King of Scots to find out what she is to expect.

493. A new Port in Peru
                            Rome
                            February 5, 1594
    A report from Spain of the 1st ult. states that, owing to the bad situation and dangerousness of the port of Nombre de Dios in Peru, the King has given orders for the construction of another port and town five miles off called San Philippo. This will be of great advantage to the trade with India.

494. Rebellion in Peru
                            Rome
                            February 15, 1594
    We hear from Spain that there has been a rising in the West Indies against the Spanish minister and that every one is killed. In addition to other hardships they tried to impose on the Peruvians a fresh tax of three millions in gold.

495. The King of Scots has turned Catholic
                            Cologne
                            March 3, 1594
    News received from Antwerp, England and Scotland is confirmed by letters from Amsterdam. Dr. Lopez has confessed under torture that he meant to poison the Queen. The King of Scotland is said for certain to have turned Catholic, but almost all his nobility and his subjects have risen against him, and the Queen of England is arming by land and sea to come to their aid. It is also stated that the General of Denmark has come to an arrangement with the Catholics in Scotland.
    Roderigo Lopez, d. 1594, a Jewish doctor from Portugal who had migrated to England. He had been living in England since 1559 and enjoyed the highest reputation. He attended Walsingham and Leicester, and in 1586 became chief Physician in Ordinary to the Queen and also a friend of Essex. During the stay of Antonio Perez in England he served as interpreter. For a reward of 50,000 crowns he was approached by Spanish spies to poison the Queen and Don Antonio. On the discovery of the plan Essex conducted the enquiry. Lopez was thrown into the Tower, arraigned and condemned to death. He was hanged and quartered at Tyburn on July 7, 1594. The Queen consented to his execution most unwillingly.

496. Will Denmark close the Sound?
                            Cologne
                            March 12, 1594
    The King of Spain sent a request to the King of Denmark for the closing of the Sound in order that he might more easily suppress his subjects in the Netherlands. The King of Denmark asked for time for reflection, and then said he would do it if the Hanse towns agreed. But the Hanse towns will not consent, and this the King of Denmark well knows.

497. The Lopez Conspiracy
                            Middelburg
                            March 17, 1594
    Great treason has been discovered in England, and some executions have already taken place; among these are Spaniards, Portuguese and Irish. Dr. Lopez may be tried any day. Letters to him have been found from the Count de Fuentes now in Brazil. He wrote to Lopez in the name of the King of Spain and procured him to kill the Queen, by poison or other means, for 50,000 crowns. The period between September and Easter was appointed for the project. Then he was to have the money. Lopez confessed this in prison himself. More arrests are being made daily, and one betrays the other. The whole affair will probably be crushed. Scotland is quiet again. They write that the Queen there has given birth to a son, and this delights the Scotch, but the English very much the opposite. The Queen of England’s ships have sailed for an unknown destination.
    Don Pedro Henriques de Azevedo, Count of Fuentes, 1526-1610, became Governor of the Netherlands in 1594, and was succeeded by Archduke Albert. He took part in Biron’s conspiracy against Henry IV.

498. English Raiders off Sicily
                            Rome
                            March 19, 1594
    Letters of the 2nd inst. from Palermo report that three well-armed English raiders are in Sicilian waters, and the island galleys dare not face them so that navigation there is very unsafe. Besides many other ships they attacked a big cornship from Ragusa, and after fighting with it for a long while and killing 50 people, they finally captured it, and cut off the heads of the Captain and two monks.

499. English Raiders in the Gulf of Lyons
                            Venice
                            April 8, 1594
    They write from Genoa that all messengers and postilions from Spain are being stopped and this no doubt suits the King of Spain very ill. By sea they have received letters of March 4 from Madrid reporting that the crossing is very dangerous, as the English raiders are in the Sea of Provence plundering and capturing.

500. English chasing Spanish Merchantmen   
                            Venice
                            April 8, 1594
    Letters of the 26th March from Genoa report that a vessel laden with wool and oil arrived there from Spain on the 22nd March. This vessel says that the fleet from New Spain has reached Havana safe and sound, and that 19 English ships are in those waters after the Spanish ships. They do not let a single ship pass, and have set fire to five villages and the whole country-side on the island of Santa Margarita. They then sailed to Sardinia for shelter. At Cadiz some vessels have left Spain for India. They are convoyed by 8 galleons and 6 pinnaces.

501. Spanish Fears for Portugal
                            Rome
                            April 30, 1594
    Madrid reports on the 3rd inst. that the King of Spain has learnt that the Queen of England is arming a fleet for Don Antonio, so the King has sent 40 Captains and 5000 horse to Portugal. Ships are being detained everywhere in order that they may offer resistance.

502. The English burn Vigo
                            Venice
                            May 6, 1594
    We receive letters of the 26th March from Madrid stating that the English corsairs are doing much damage to the people along the coast of Galicia, and that injury from them is dreaded daily, as they carry off all vessels. The 9000 soldiers intended to embark for Italy can therefore not be sent off. Four English ships which arrived in the port of Vigo in Galicia expected to find the Indian fleet which had put in because of contrary winds, but as they did not get these vessels, they set the port on fire and sailed away. The English corsairs also attacked a Venetian ship, La Stella, but she escaped with great difficulty to the shelter of a fortress. The English also drove ashore a Lisbon ship laden with war stores.

503. Prince Henry’s Sponsors
                        From Groningen Camp
                        June 30, 1594
                        background: The child was Henry, Prince of Wales, 1594-1612, elder brother of King Charles I.
    The envoys of the King of Scots who have come here to invite the States General to stand sponsor to the King’s child have been visiting His Excellency at Groningen camp. In combination with the Magistrates he gave the Scotch envoys a magnificent banquet last Sunday and presented each of them with a gold chain worth 1000 Rhinegulden. What the baptismal gifts will be of course we shall hear. Herr von Brederode and other gentlemen have been deputed to accompany the envoys to Scotland.

504. 40,000,000 from Indian for Spain
                            Venice
                            July 8, 1594
    We hear from Spain that the King of India is dead and has left His Sacred Majesty of Spain forty millions in gold. The Indian fleet would seem to be bringing more wealth than ever before, to wit:
    Twenty-five millions in gold of which 12 millions are for His Majesty, and 13 for private individuals.

505. Turks at Aden
                            Venice
                            July 15, 1594
    By order of the Sultan the Pasha of Cairo is said to have sent many ships by the Red Sea to Aden, and there they captured some Portuguese fortresses in order to stop navigation by the Portuguese to the East Indies, and to bring to Cairo, Alexandria and Venice the spices which have hitherto been carried off to Lisbon.

506. Prince Henry’s Sponsors again
                            The Hague
                            July 21, 1594
                            background: Large handsome bumpers of silver or gold were then called “heads.”
    On the last day of this month our envoys are to start for the christening in Scotland. They are:  Herr von Brederode with three other gentlemen, Herr von Gröningen, Monsieur de Sainte-Aldegonde and one more gentleman from the Hague. At the Hague two double or gold heads are being made, each one costing 6000 Rhinegulden. They are to take these with them and give them to the child as a christening present.

507. More English Captures at Sea
                            Middelburg
                            July 21, 1594
    News comes here that the English have sailed to Brittany with some warships to relieve Brest. The English have once more brought into Plymouth a big spice vessel of 900 tons and three other ships as well. In the West Indies they have sunk two ships, saved the cargo and thrown the crews overboard.

508. Precedence at Sea
                            Rome
                            September 3, 1594
    The disputes which have so long prevailed among Christian powers about precedence at sea have now been settled. Only the Pope and the King of Spain can sail their galleys with colours flying. If they meet they must salute each other. All other nations must yield precedence to these two.

509. The Spaniards take Brest
                            Antwerp
                            September 3, 1594
    This evening comes news from Middelburg that the Spaniards in Brittany have captured Brest and destroyed the English warships, taking two of them. They are now lords and masters of this port, and the English will have a bad neighbour, for with a fair wind they can cross from thee to England in 24 hours. With their galleys they will be able to visit it daily and loot. No doubt an Armada will be sent against England from Spain as well.

510. The Dutch go to India
                            Antwerp
                            September 3, 1594
    At Amsterdam, besides the three ships which recently sailed for India, three other large vessels are being got ready, also to go to India, in order to see if they can arrange a harbour for Indian trade, and somewhat diminish the King of Spain’s traffic with the East Indies. If they find a good passage it will be very profitable for this country. Towards this voyage the States General have granted 2000 Rhinegulden and ten of the chief men of business the same sum. If the voyage is successful, the money will be repaid to the State General.
    This was the Van Verre Co., founded in 1593 and at the time the most important Dutch trading company in the Indies. It was enlarged in 1598 by fusion with smaller companies.

511. The North-East Passage
                            Antwerp
                            September 24, 1594
    It is reported from the Hague that one of the vessels making for India has come back to say she has found the passage behind Norway. The sailing is very good there, but one must be careful to choose the months of June, July and August, as at all other times the channel will be found to be icebound. Therefore three ships will go there from here next November. This will give the Spaniards and Portuguese on their voyages a nasty shock.

512. The Danzigers fear to put to Sea
                            Danzig
                            October 15, 1594
    We have no further news from Spain about the ship recently lost. The English are again strong at sea, and people here have requested our King to take measures against them. So the Queen of England has been written to and her answer is awaited. Hardly any one in our town is spared by the raiders now, and it grows more and more dangerous to put to sea. God render it better.

513. Rumours of Peace
                            Antwerp
                            October 15, 1594
                            background: Archduke Ernest of Austria, 1553-1595, passed most of his youth at the Spanish Court. In 1592 he was suggested to the French Leaguers by Philip II for the Crown of France, but was rejected. In the same year he became Governor of the Netherlands, but did not make his entry till 1594. His best efforts for reconciliation in the Netherlands failed owing to the strong interest which the Spanish nobility had in the continuation of the war. As the French troops were entering the Netherlands the Archduke suddenly died.
    They say for certain that the Queen of England has despatched a person of distinction to His Serene Highness Archduke Ernest, and that he has arrived at Ostend, and at once sent a herald to Brussels to obtain a pass from His Highness in order to appear before His Highness on his Queen’s behalf. Letters of the 10th inst. from Middelburg state that a German mission of unknown origin has been with the Queen of England and has passed on thence to the King of France. It might therefore be presumed that this is preliminary to negotiations for peace. May the Lord God in His graciousness grant it!

514. More English Prizes off Central America
                            Antwerp
                            October 22, 1594
    English letters of the 15th inst. from London report that the English have taken two vessels, one of them off Mexico with over 200,000 crowns in goods and cash on board.
    Herr von Brederode and the other envoys who stood sponsor to the young King of Scots have arrived in London. Each of them has been presented by the King with a fine horse and a gold chain. They are to leave for Zeeland again in a week.

515. The West Indian Fleet fears to leave Havana
                            Lyons
                            October 27, 1594
    A messenger from Spain for Italy rode through here just lately. He brings news that the Indian fleet with its very valuable cargo is to winter at Havana. It cannot get out, as English ships are there. They are said to have carried off 15 small vessels from New Spain containing leather and other goods.

516. No Fleet no Pay for Spanish Troops
                            Antwerp
                            November 5, 1594
    The English embassy to Brussels is daily expected, but its object is unknown. Some say the Queen desires permission for her subjects to come every four months to this country with their woollen garments and English cloths and sell the goods here. The upshot of the business will appear later no doubt.
    Spanish letters announce that the fleet from New Spain and Peru will not come in to Seville before May. This is bad news for this country, as it will be impossible to pay the troops here and maintain discipline.

517. Preparations for the North-East Passage
                            Antwerp
                            November 6, 1594
    On the last day of last month the envoys came back to the Hugue from Scotland. They tell of all the splendid ceremonies at the christening and of the great honour paid to the English and Low Countries representatives.
    The ships which are to sail along the new-found passage to India are being energetically equipped and will commence their voyage before Christmas. There are three big ships and a small yacht. It is said that there are to be about 100 men on each ship. The States General are providing the traders with guns and ammunition.

518. The Queen celebrates her Reign of Thirty-Six Years
                            Cologne
                            December 15, 1594
    From London in England come letters of the 29th ult. saying that the Queen there gave a great banquet on the anniversary of her accession thirty-six years ago. On that day three flags were presented to the Queen taken by her troops from the Spaniards in Brittany.
    We hear from Scotland that the King has caused the rebels under Spanish influence to be executed, nobles with the sword, commoners bribed by the Spaniards with the rope.

519. Six Papal Ships captured
                            Antwerp
                            January 18, 1595
    We hear by letters of the 3rd inst. from London that Captain Drake with another knight named Hawkins is to fit out a strong naval expedition, composed of ten Queen’s warships and forty warships altogether, as well as two yachts. From Zeeland we have news that over 100 vessels with general cargo and salt have come there and to Holland from Spain, Portugal, France and England, and that still more are expected.
    They write from England that their warships have captured and taken into Flushing six Papal warships. As the crews give each other no quarter, it is to be presumed that the crews of these vessels have all been killed.

520. Moratorium in Spain
                            Rome
                            February 11, 1595
    Spanish letters of the 1st January confirm that His Majesty on request of the traders has forbidden all payments at fairs and other places of business till after the arrival of the Indian fleet, on condition however that those who owe bills and demurrage fees must pay interest on them monthly. It is thought that this measure would not have been resorted to unless there had been a risk of many failures in Spain and elsewhere.

521. An Anglo-Turkish Fleet
                            Venice
                            February 17, 1595
    From Genoese letters we gather that English vessels laden with metal have again put into that port and are awaiting further arrivals. In a short time thee vessels are to meet the corsair Amurad and then the combined force is to join the English Armada sailing this spring to lie in wait for the Indian fleet.

522. French Ships preparing also
                            Antwerp
                            February 22, 1595
    About eight sail of the English fleet are said to have proceeded to Spanish India. The great Armada will not start out till next month—March—and seven ships are going to the coast of Brazil. The French also are arming heavily and much raiding is to be feared. There will be little trade by sea this summer.

523. Why cannot the Pope help to pay for the War?
                            Rome
                            March 15, 1595
    The King of Spain has had the Pope informed that he does not oppose the pardoning of the King of France, and that the Pope should act as he thinks best for the honour of God and Holy Church. Nevertheless His Majesty is resolved to wage unceasing war against Navarre. Concerning help from the King against the Turks, His Majesty asks to be excused, owing to the delay of the Indian fleet, and begs the Pope to draw temporarily on the Treasury of the Church in the fortress here till the above-mentioned fleet comes in.

524. Perhaps the English will stay at home
                            Antwerp
                            April 6, 1595
    Since messengers can no longer cross by Calais but must sail to England from Zeeland, few letters have been coming over here. Also we do not hear that the English Armada has started. It is rumoured that the Admiral of England is opposing Captain Drake, and that for various reasons the Queen will not let the fleet put out. It would be excellent if the English fleet stayed at home, for then the Indian fleet would get to Spain more safely.

525. More doubtful Peace Rumours
                            Antwerp
                            April 22, 1595
    It is generally said here, and generally hoped too, that the States General of Holland and Zeeland will part from France and England and make a separate peace with the Provinces of this country. However, they refuse to negotiate with the Court. But we cannot yet make out how this peace can be concluded, for if the States General quarrel with England they will have great difficulty in getting rid of this Queen’s troops from Holland, Zeeland and Flanders. We shall soon learn whether these peace negotiations are continued or not. Some declare they have received letters from Zeeland to say the English Armada has already put out. In good time we shall hear whether they are after the fleet from India. The Lord protect it from the English!

526. Anxiety for the Spanish Fleet
                            Antwerp
                            June 3, 1595
    On the 29th ult. the usual mail from Seville arrived here. It brings letters of the 17th April. Some people have received letters from Seville via Madrid dated 29th, sent after the ordinary mail. These letters announce that on the 19th ult. a caravel arrived at Seville with the report from the Indian fleet. It brought news that this fleet sailed from Havana on the 13th March and the caravel sailed in company for nine days. Then it came alone to Seville to bring the report. We hope to God that the fleet has arrived now this very moment, and suppose that its arrival will be at once announced here by messenger. The day before yesterday letters of the 23rd ult. were received from London saying that the English warships had picked up and brought into England a vessel from the India fleet which has lost its way. These letters also announce that the whole Indian fleet has sailed from Havana and that it is believed it will reach Seville.

527. Sacrilege by an Englishman at Rome
                            Rome
                            June 17, 1595
    During a procession held yesterday to initiate the forty hours’ prayer in St. Agatha’s church a young Englishman of 25 smote the Sacrament out of an Archbishop’s hand with such force that it fell to the ground and the crystal of the monstrance wounded the hand of the criminal. A crowd at once gathered, dashed burning torches in his face, and tried to kill him, but the Archbishop restrained them. The Englishman has been thrown into prison.

528. Pernambuco taken by the English
                            Antwerp
                            June 24, 1595
    News comes here by letter from Amsterdam and Middelburg that the English and French have taken the town of Pernambuco in Brazil. They are building a large fortress there and this will cause consternation in Spain. It is also announced from Middelburg that a Calicut vessel has put in there which, together with several others, has been pillaged by the English.

529. The Englishman burnt
                            Rome
                            June 24, 1595
    Last Monday the Inquisition handed over to the secular power the Englishman who, as already mentioned, insulted the Sacrament. On the Tuesday following he was bound to a cart, his right hand was cut off and he was then taken through the town. He was frequently smitten with lighted brands by the executioner and finally burnt alive in the Piazza del Capitolio. During his examination he named several other knaves heretical like himself; therefore the Pope gave orders that for the avoidance of future outrages during the processions before the forty hours’ prayer four Swiss are to walk as guards by the Sacrament.

530. English Cloth at Constantinople
                            Venice
                            July 28, 1595
    Some English vessels heavily laden with cloth have arrived at Constantinople. This will do much damage to the Venetians, as, being short of money, the English will let their wares go very cheap.

531. Spanish Designs on Ireland
                            Antwerp
                            August 5, 1595
                            background: 
    This refers to the great Irish Rebellion led by Hugh O’Neill, Earl of Tyrone, and lasting till after the death of Elizabeth. Sir Henry Bagenal tried to crush it in vain, O’Neill beat the English in numerous engagements of which that at Yellow Ford in 1598 was the most important. His assistant in the struggle was his brother-in-law, O’Donnell. In the course of the war O’Neill sent envoys to Spain to urge Philip II to furnish help. The Queen sent Essex to Ireland to suppress the rising. He frittered his forces away and had to conclude an armistice with the Irish. To him this was fatal. The next English commanders, Mountjoy and Carew, were more successful. In 1601 the Irish received reinforcements from Spain, but they were shut up in Kinsale. The Irish met with serious reverses and the Spaniards returned home. O’Donnell was sent to Spain to get help, but died there of poison. After capture by storm of the fort of Dunboy the revolt came to an end. The English leaders devastated the country terribly. O’Neill and O’Donnell’s brother were pardoned by James I and their confiscated properties were restored to them.
    Some people here have received letters from London declaring that the Irish have defeated some ten thousand English—but this seems rather a lot. It is thought, too, that the King of Spain’s fleet, now being equipped in Spain, is to sail in the direction of Ireland. Therefore Captain Drake and his Armada are not to leave England. What there is in this time will show.
    Some also have letters of the 24th ult. from Lisbon to say that the English in Brazil have taken 700 cases of sugar, some 1200 cwt. of Brazil wood, and a quantity of pepper, all coming in a vessel from Calicut. A very ruinous business. May the Lord repay each one his loss and avert such rapine in future.

532. Loot from Brazil
                            Cologne
                            August 10, 1595
    Amsterdam letters of the 5th state that four vessels have arrived there from Lisbon and that more are daily expected from San Lucar. These letters also announce that the English have plundered Pernambuco, a thing which very little foresight would have prevented, as it would have been easily possible to concentrate a defence force of several thousands in the place. The English have already brought part of the loot to London. This is why pepper and other spices, as also linen, sugar and Pernambuco wood are disposed of very cheap, so that these English are spoiling trade in all direction.

533. Spain, the Philippines and Japan
                            Rome
                            August 12, 1595
    The Spanish Court has been informed that the Emperor of Japan offers to maintain close friendship with the Governor of the Philippines and the King of Spain. He will also admit the Barefooted Friars and the Jesuits to his dominions.
    The Governor of Peru has discovered a new country inhabited by very short men with long beards. He has sent some of them to Spain.

534. Spanish Raid in Cornwall
                            Antwerp
                            August 23, 1595
    They write from Zeeland that some Spanish warships with about 1000 soldiers on board have raided Cornwall in England from the sea. They have pillaged and burnt some houses there and carried off many people. Now if the King of Spain’s well-equipped Armada should put to sea this same summer, people in England will have to look out for themselves. So Captain Drake and his fleet are staying at home to make sure which way this Spanish Armada is going.

535. Drake sails for Havana
                            Cologne
                            October 12, 1595
    We have news here that Captain Drake with 60 ships has sailed for Havana. He has taken with him masons, stones and lime, in order to land 4000 men at Havana and build a fortress to stop the King of Spain’s navigation.

536. Chinese and Japanese Christians at War
                            Antwerp
                            November 18, 1595
    The Queen of England is hurriedly raising troops and has already sent warships to Ireland because she fears that the Armada prepared in Spain might make a descent upon Ireland, as the King of Spain has had a quantity of arms purchased at Milan and other places.
    Ships coming from Portugal confirm that the Christians on the island of Japan are waging war against those in China. This suits the Portuguese Indies excellently.

537. Preparations for War in Ireland
                            London
                            December 30, 1595
    The Queen is arming vigorously. From this city alone she has demanded 20,000 men and 20 full-armed ships, but we hope to get off with 6-8000 men and 15 warships. The Queen is having all her ships armed, and her whole people throughout the kingdom has been assembled on horse and on foot.

538. Preparations for War in Ireland
                            Antwerp
                            January 19, 1596
    Letters from London of December 30 state that there is much fear in England that the Spanish Armada is aimed at the country. So the whole land is astir to arm every man. The King of Scots is doing the same. He has commanded his people to provide themselves with arms. Also he is having his seaports well garrisoned and equipped with all military requirements. In the meanwhile efforts are being made to crush the rising in Ireland. They have heard in England that the Eastern Hanse towns are despatching ships to Spain with all sorts of materials for shipbuilding. So Lord Cumberland is to sail out with some warships and lie in wait for and capture these Baltic vessels. For the English propose to prevent them from equipping ships and crews.

539. Brescian Munitions for Spain
                            Rome
                            January 20, 1596
    By letters from Brescia we learn that the agents of the King of Spain have made a contract with the artisans of the town for 20,000 gun barrels and 7000 musket barrels among other things. Also they have ordered 5000 cuirasses. The Brescia workmen are to deliver 2000 articles weekly. In one place belonging to Brescia the Spaniards have ordered 30,000 balls of assorted calibres.

540. Spanish Trade with London never greater
                            Antwerp
                            January 27, 1596
    They write from London on the 12th inst. that a severe gale blew that that week, in consequence of which a ship called the Samaritan bound for France with a cargo worth £12,000 was lost with all hands.
    For 25 years past not so many figs and raisins nor so much wine have come from Spain to London as just now. There are 7000 barrels of wine in stock and over 22,000 baskets of raisins, not counting the blue ones. The fall in prices is very great.
    Letters from Middelburg of the 25th announce that some ships have recently come from Portugal which were only 13 days on the voyage. They report that the Spanish Armada with 8000 men has sailed to look for Captain Drake at Havana.

541. Drake at Havana
                            Amsterdam
                            January 27, 1596
    News reaches here that Captain Drake has arrived at Havana. They are greatly annoyed at this in Spain and 28 ships are sailing there from Portugal, as well as some from Spain. So there may well be blows in that locality, and the Queen of England will doubtless send warships and troops there.

542. Drake at Havana
                            Antwerp
                            February 10, 1596
    Confirmatory information comes from England of Captain Drake’s capture of two forts at Havana. Another sixteen warships with troops and all sorts of munitions have been sent out to him from England. Whether they will arrive soon enough and whether also the Armada of the King of Spain will be able to drive Drake out of Havana time will show.

543. Chinese Gold inaccessible
                            Venice
                            February 16, 1596
    The gold-bearing island found a little while ago by the Spaniards in the Kingdom of China seems to be uninhabitable owing to its poisonously unhealthy climate, so that it is utterly impossible to dig gold mines there.

544. Rebellion in Ireland
                            Antwerp
                            February 17, 1596
    England is quite, but in Ireland, owing to the Earl who lately rebelled, there seems to be a rising. He is presumably acting in concert with the King of Spain, so the English are anxious and are again sending troops to Ireland to lay hold of the rebels and drive them out entirely. The English are not the least afraid of the King of Spain having any designs on Ireland or trying to introduce troops into the country. Lord Cumberland has already sailed with some ships to meet the Spaniards.

545. English driven back from Porto Rico and Nombre de Dios
                            Madrid
                            February 24, 1596
    Definite news came from Seville yesterday that, of the five ships sent to Porto Rico for the 2 1/2 millions left behind by the last fleet, three have reached San Lucar in safety with the whole of the gold. In Guadeloupe harbour not far from Porto Rico they met the English fleet, which was expecting five of its own ships there. Seeing the Spanish ships they took them for their own, and therefore sent a vessel to meet them. This vessel our people took, and thus learnt that the English meant to sail to Porto Rico. So our vessels made all haste to Porto Rico, to put it in a fit state of defence. This was done. They hid the ship containing the gold, together with the captured English ship and two of their own, in the harbour, thus blocking the entrance. And what is more they so strengthened their guns and troops that, when the English came along seven days later, they met with such a reception that the General who accompanied Drake in the fleet together with 200 others was killed, and the English had to sail fruitlessly away. The Spaniards only lost 11 men. The English made off towards Nombre de Dios, but that place has been warned, as have all others, and it is hoped that they will all offer sufficient resistance.

546. English driven back from Porto Rico and Nombre de Dios
                            Madrid
                            March 7, 1596
    Yesterday letters from Seville report that the English fleet passed near Nombre de Dios, which was awaiting them without anxiety. The women and children and the chief valuables had been sent for safety into the country round about. The Spanish fleet has arrived unharmed in New Spain.

547. The Turkish Fleet will soon be ready
                            Venice
                            March 15, 1596
    Fresh letters from Constantinople of the 19th of February announce that there is being no delay over the equipment of the 150 galleys which are to put to sea, as the Sultan has heard that Captain Drake is at Havana, and means to establish himself there. So the Spanish Armada will have enough to do to defend those places.

548. Drake has not really taken Havana
                            Rome
                            March 16, 1596
    Drake appears not to have taken Havana harbour, but the Seville merchants for their own profit say he has, in order to raise the prices of certain articles. strict enquiry is therefore being made for the originators of this fictitious report.

549. The Sultan to go to Adrianople
                            Venice
                            March 22, 1596
    Constantinople letters of February 25 confirm that the Turkish Emperor is definitely moving to Adrianople. The English envoy is to accompany him there, and the Sultan has assigned him 500 sequins travelling expenses.

550. Turkish Preparations
                            Venice
                            March 29, 1596
    Letters from Constantinople announce that the Grand Turk and the English envoy are expected daily. Ninety well-found galleys have already been launched from the Arsenal. On land the Grand Turk is raising what troops he requires. He seems to have assembled a large number, but they are only an untrained rabble. An English ship has arrived at Constantinople containing many handsome presents sent by this Queen to the Grand Turk and his Pashas. He is being requested also to use all possible diligence in arming strongly at sea against the King of Spain.

551. English Fleet for the West Indies
                            Amsterdam
                            March 30, 1596
                            background: Sir Francis Vere, 1560-1609, General of the English troops in the service of the United Netherlands. He did very well in this capacity.
    They write from England that great preparations are being made there, and that France, Scotland, Denmark and even the Netherlands are taking their share. Drake appears to be on the island of Cuba. The ships fitting out in England are to be ready in a week, and are taking a quantity of stone and lime. Many nobles are said to be accompanying them. From every English Company in Holland and Zeeland one-third of the seasoned soldiers are being taken and replaced by fresh men from England. Colonel Vere is going too. The Lord Admiral, Lord Cumberland and Lord Essex are coming from England, and it is conjectured that 25,000 soldiers will be embarked.

552. Some Money reaches Spain
                            Rome
                            April 6, 1596
                            background: See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 163, Drake.
    Letters of March 8 from Spain relate that three azabras have put into the port of Seville with 2 1/2 millions in gold and 500 barrels of cochineal off the flagship, which should have got there last year with the Indian fleet. These vessels report that five royal ships fell in with two of Drake’s ships neave Porto Rico and took one. They learnt from the sailors that this Drake is not far off there, and means to return to Porto Rico. Three of our ships sailed there also, but two of them were taken by Drake and burnt. Expecting to capture the port, he met with such resistance from the inhabitants that he lost 400 men.

553. Calais in Distress, Ireland in Rebellion
                            Middelburg
                            April 11, 1596
    The wife of the Governor of Calais together with forty other women has come to Flushing to ask for help. A Company of English mercenaries started at once, and 12 warships have got ready to sail there. The port is to be kept open for four or five days so that the inhabitants may procure help from here and from England, as the town is of great importance to both parties. More Spanish soldiers are said again to have arrived in Ireland to keep the disturbances there afoot. The Queen also has sent more soldiers there. From Amsterdam letters of the 13th inst. we learn that the Cardinal is besieging the town of Calais, and that orders have been given for help to be sent there. The ships too have been got ready with all speed, and Count Maurice went on the 11th from the Hague to Zeeland to see the fleet start. The ships that are being sent by the city of Amsterdam should also putout any day, and the entire fleet of English, French and Netherlanders is said to be already assembling. The States General are despatching troops from Flanders as well, and are sending the Count of Solms there to look closely after things.
George Everard, Count of Solms, Lord of Münsterberg, 1568-1602, second son of Count Ernest of Solms-Hohensolms. He entered the military service of the Netherlands in 1583 and was put in command of the Netherlands troops in Zeeland in 1587. In 1591 he was made Governor of Hulst. His later campaigns were unsuccessful, but owing to his relationship with the Orange family he retained his command and was frequently employed in raising troops in Germany.

554. Calais surrenders to Cardinal Albert of Austria
                            Antwerp
                            April 15, 1596
    After Cardinal Albert of Austria had besieged the town of Calais and taken two forts, the surrender of the town was arranged as follows:
    The citizens retain lives and property and pay a sum of money. The Cardinal can bring troops into the town at his pleasure, and the Governor and his soldiers at once retire to the castle. He is to leave all munitions in the town, and is to be allowed six days’ grace. If in that period he is not relieved, he must surrender the castle also to the Cardinal. On hearing these tidings the great bell was rung here, and the Te Deum sung in the church. The Queen of England is said to be at Dover with several thousand men, and the loss of the town of Calais will prevent her fleet from putting to sea.

555. The Surrender due to Treachery
                            Amsterdam
                            April 20, 1596
    The siege of Calais does not please many people, and to judge by reports it would seem to be lost, for it was sold long since. The Governor has offered no resistance, and has let the enemy advance as he pleased. It will be little advantage to trade and navigation as the danger now will be the Spanish Armada. The Queen of England will have ill neighbours, and what she is going to do with the King in this part of the world we shall be anxious to hear soon, as it is of importance to all countries.

556. The Pope thanks God
                            Rome
                            May 18, 1596
    A Consistory was held last Monday, and amid great rejoicings God was thanked for the conquest of Calais, since for the future a harbour is open for the Roman Church to oppose the heretics in England.

557. Dysentery in Drake’s Fleet. Drake dead
                            Antwerp
                            May 18, 1596
    They write from Middelburg on the the 16th inst. that five ships have arrived from Spain reporting that dysentery has broken out among the crews of Captain Drake, and that Drake himself and his second in command and many of his men have died of it. Upon this the troops left Havana and all the forts and sailed back and ran into the Spanish Armada. They were so completely encircled by it that not more than three ships of their number got back to England.
    Others say, however, that Drake has captured an island near Havana called Santa Martha, has fortified Havana and been joined by many Indians. The English Armada, 100 warships and 50 storeships strong, is said to have sailed for Plymouth and to be awaiting a fair wind there. With the fleet are 14,000 veteran soldiers, and many nobles who have volunteered. Colonel Vere has arrived here from Holland with 2500 well-equipped soldiers, who are also able to sail.

558. Guardships in the Channel
                            Antwerp
                            June 1, 1596
                            background: Irish Rebellion over
    The announcement dated 16th comes from London that the fleet has not yet sailed, but is to start in five or six days. The Queen has stationed five of her warships between Calais and Dover, to keep guard there. The Duc de Bouillon has been informed by the Queen that she will continue to afford assistance to his King, and 4000 English soldiers have already arrived at Boulogne, sent there by the Queen.
    The disorder in Ireland is now quite at an end, and the Earl of Tyrone has been reconciled with the Queen and given her his son as a hostage. The King of Scots has publicly commanded his subjects to keep on good terms with the Queen and to afford her help if the King of Spain should make an attack upon her.
    Henri de la tour, Duc de Bouillon, 1555-1623.

559. English Aid for France
                            Antwerp
                            June 8, 1596
    The Duc de Bouillon has returned to France well content. The Queen has promised to send him 10,000 soldiers and to give him a sum of money as well. In return she demands Boulogne in pledge, and when Calais is retaken it is to be ceded to her, whereupon she will give Boulogne back.

560. Delight of Philip over Drake’s Death
                            Rome
                            June 22, 1596
    Letters reached here recently by a Spanish messenger to the effect that the King has had definite news of the death of Drake and that fifteen large English ships which Drake had with him are lost. His Sacred Majesty was extremely delighted at this news and some Spanish ships fell upon the English, who at once fled. But the Spanish General sped after them and took two, finding on board 60 soldiers and 20 nobles.

561. The English at Cadiz
                            Madrid
                            July 6, 1596
    The English commander is said to have left Plymouth on the 11th June and to be sailing towards us. When this was heard of at Lisbon the people moved out with women and children in large numbers. They entirely abandoned the Arsenal and the suburbs. But the English did not sail to Portugal but to Cape St. Vincent and Cadiz. There, however, they fell into a calm and could not move. But in the meanwhile the people had armed, and came in multitudes on horse and foot from Seville and Jerez de la Frontera to Cadiz. In spite of this the English sent small boats into the bay of Cadiz, which is the harbour, and of the fleet lying there ready to go to India they burnt two ships and drove ashore another two which tried to escape, although 14 galleys, badly armed it is true, were in the vicinity. It is unknown whether they have done further damagae, as also whether they meant to take Cadiz, or what other plan they may have. So far there are about 130 ships all together, but as Cadiz is strongly held by troops, it is hoped that they will fail to do anything.

562. Consternation in Spain
                            Antwerp
                            July 27, 1596
    On the 24th inst. there arrived at Flushing a pinnace from England with letters from this Queen to Count Maurice. The letters announce that the English fleet has landed at Cadiz in Andalusia, and taken the town and 30 ships laden for India. So there is great consternation in Spain, particularly because the Barbary Moors have joined the English with their galleys. A thousand fresh English soldiers have arrived at Flushing, and more troops are expected from Scotland and France to give the Cardinal plenty to do.

563. Capture and Looting of Cadiz
                            Middelburg
                            July 30, 1596
                            background: Arsinoe is a town in Egypt.
    On the 27th inst. I reported what news had come in about the English fleet. Since then another eight vessels, 22 days out from San Lucar, have come in. They bring not only confirmation but also plenty of details of events up to their departure. When the English arrived before Cadiz on the last day of June they found there four big galleons with 1000 to 1200 men on board, together with 20 to 22 galleys. These vessels moved up in crescent formation. The English Vice-Admiral advanced against them and, after an exchange of shots, he anchored to their right. In this position the two fleets fought furiously for a long while, but as the wind was unfavourable for the Spaniards they fell into disorder, and the English burnt the two galleons San Philippo and San Andrea. They also sank several galleys which could not get away. Then the Englishmen rapidly entered the harbour, where they found 36 ships with mixed cargoes for New Spain. On the next day they landed troops and captured the town, but they met with much resistance so that there was great loss on both sides. The Spaniards defended themselves for a long time bravely, but the English were 20,000 strong, including 300 horse. The English subsequently sailed to Santa Maria and there and at San Lucar plundered and burnt. Some nobles in the fort at San Lucar in expectation of relief held the place for five days, but in the end they had to surrender. The fear now is of the English going on to Seville where they could completely devastate the open country. God protect the unhappy country folk, already in such fear and terror as prevail all over Spain. In company with the English were five galleys from Barbary. They relate that the King of Arsinoe has armed also and raised 40-50,000 men. He is said also to have given permission to the English to put into Barbary and obtain provisions and other military stores. The English have already sent some captured ships to Barbary, and the outcome is awaited with great anxiety as heavy losses are feared amongst the traders.

564. Sensation in Venice
                            Venice
                            August 4, 1596
    When the English fleet appeared off Cape St. Vincent it turned towards the small town of Gibraltar and there entered the Straits or Narrows. Here it came upon some vessels with spice and other wares. When the Spaniards realised this, they set fire to the ships to prevent the enemy using them and escaped to land themselves. Then the English sailed to Cadiz, where large numbers of armed people confronted them on shore. But after a bombardment with big guns from 200 ships, some of the people turned to flight, others surrendered. Antonio Perez helped the English greatly in their capture and looting of Cadiz. Some say the town surrendered and paid 300,000 crowns. There is all sorts of talk, especially about the merchants who drove up the price of cochineal and other Indian commodities. As I close this letter three messengers from different firms in Florence arrive and report, not only the attack on Cadiz, and the capture of the town by the English fleet, but their snapping up of four millions of gold in four caravels bound to Portugal from India; two were for the King, two for private individuals. According to the Spaniards the English fleet seems to grow stronger every day.

565. The Inhabitants of Seville are running away
Amsterdam
August 8, 1596
background: Copy of a document of August 3, 1596, concerning Cadiz.
    Eight vessels from San Lucar arrived in Holland here and also at Middelburg on August 1. They had escaped from arrest and were mostly in ballast with a little oil. They relate how the English Armada arrived there on July 29, and at once entered the bay of Cadiz. There they found 18 galleys, 9 galleons and 40 ships, all ready to sail for India and New Spain, and richly laden with all sorts of valuable goods. On the very next day, July 30, they landed their troops to take Cadiz. They at once made two attacks, during which 3000 English are said to have fallen; however they had the better of it. On the same day they set fire to two of the King of Spain’s ships, the Vice-Admiral’s ship with 600 soldiers, and the galleon Philippo of 1400 tons with 1000 soldiers. On the English side three large ships and many small ones were swamped or sunk by gunfire. On the 1st July they carried the town by storm and murdered all they found with arms in their hands. It is rumoured that 10,000 men were in the town and many were killed but most fled. The English at once destroyed the bridges, and although 500 horse came from Jerez to lend aid, they were driven back by the English musketeers. As the Spaniards saw that the bridge was gone, and they could render no help, they and 6000 soldiers in Jeres took to flight. Two days before the capture of the town the Duke of Medina Sidonia was at Cadiz, and went from there to Porto Santa Maria to restore order and obtain more troops. help is daily expected from Lisbon. The people of San Lucar were terrified also, for they feared the English would soon come to them too. There is said to be such panic throughout Spain that all the people, especially those of Seville, are running away. This looks like a great change, and it will cause great poverty among merchants. May God the Lord dispose all for the best!

566. The English have sailed away, but where to?
                            Antwerp
                            August 12, 1596
    Three ships from the English Armada are said to have arrived this week, and to have reported that the English have sailed away from Cadiz with their booty. The English are only out for loot. This characteristic is innate. Antonio Perez, former Secretary to the King of Spain, who fled from Aragon to England, is said to have left after the capture of Cadiz with 80 sail for an unknown destination.

567. Perhaps they will quarrel over the Spoil
                            Venice
                            August 16, 1596
    Letters from Spain of the 22nd ult. describe the brutalities practised by the English at the capture of Cadiz. They plundered and burnt everything and extorted 200,000 ducats ransom from the inhabitants. They pulled down churches, took pictures, sacred elements and bells from churches and towers, and inflicted every sort of indignity on priests and nuns. They have sailed off with many prisoners who could not pay their ransom, presumably to the island of Terceira, to lie in wait for the Seville fleet. However, it has returned to Seville. The English living here state that gentlemen of very high rank among the English have commanded the convent ladies to accompany them to the island of Corvo, and that this has been done. The fleet is said to have fallen out over the loot, so it might share the fate of Drake.

568. The English Fleet returns home with its Booty
                            Antwerp
                            August 31, 1596
    Letters from Middelburg of the 29th inst. state that London letters of the 24th report that the English fleet with all vessels from Holland and Zeeland has returned to England with great spoils, notably much linen, steel, iron, sugar and many other things found on the Indian ships, and besides this 200 metal guns. The ships are discharging at Portsmouth and Plymouth. With the first fair wind the Earl of Cumberland is to sail with 60 vessels to lie in wait for the Indian fleet.

569. Unrest in Africa
                           Rome
                            September 7, 1596
                            background: Men and Munitions commandeered by Philip
    Spanish letters of the 19th August announce that the Moors in Africa get more and more restless as time goes on, that 20,000 of them have again banded together and are doing great damage by robbery and murder near Ceuta. As the English after their invasion of Cadiz caused great unrest among the countries bordering on Spain, the whole of Spain is roused, and both kingdoms of the ancient realm of Castile long to defend themselves against the English. They have promised their King 30 millions at fixed intervals over twenty years, 1 1/2 millions to be paid yearly. The English fleet is said to be off Cape St. Vincent, but is sailing to the Azores to wait for the Indian fleet. The Spanish letters state in conclusion that the King has ordered all the princes and gentlemen of his country to deliver to him at a reasonable price all big guns which they have for defence in their castles.

570. Turkey will not last much longer
                            Rome
                            September 14, 1596.
    In addition to the 30 millions granted to the King of Spain, as recently notified, many towns have subsequently offered to raise and maintain a strong body of troops at their own expense for the duration of the war.
    A flysheet will shortly be printed here announcing that the Ottoman Empire and Mahomed III, the ruling Turkish Emperor, will soon come to an end, and that Constantinople will fall into the hands of the Christians. This is to happen in 1597 or a little later in accordance with the forecasts of all Prophets and of Holy Writ, as well as of the Turks.

571. Malays in Ceylon
                            Rome,
                            eptember 28, 1596.
    Vessels lately arrived in Spain have brought 2 millions of gold and the report that the capital of an island called Ceylon in the East Indies is being besieged by 50,000 Malays. So 4000 Portuguese have sailed as a defence force, to relieve the town and end the siege.

572. Embargo on Navigation to Spain
                            Cologne
                            October 17, 1596.
    Letters from Amsterdam of the 12th inst. state that the States General have combined with England and France to forbid navigation to Spain. Those who had intended to sail thither have been ordered to unload their ships, and those bound to England and France must give surety that they are travelling nowhere else. At the moment all the legislatures of the United Provinces are assembled at the Hague to arrange an increase in convoy fees for the maintenance of troops. This embargo on navigation will be a serious loss to many, and the ordinary man will find it hard to earn a livelihood with provisions so dear.

573. Gold and Silver reaches San Lucar
                            Venice
                            October 25, 1596.
    We hear from England that this Queen presented on their departure to the Duc de Bouillon a silver loving cup worth 10,000 crowns, and to Monsieur de Chartres, Governor of Dieppe, a jewel worth 5000.
    By special letters from Spain we hear that the fleet reached San Lucar with the gold and silver on September 27. It is said to have left Havana on the 3rd ult. and never to have crossed so quickly before.
italics:See Fugger News-Letter (First Series), Letter 175, Conferment of the Garter on Henry IV.

574. English Alliance with France
                            Lyons
                            November 7, 1596.
    The English envoy has started back home from Rouen after confirming the alliance afresh. The King has presented him with many fine horses and a green cloak ornamented with diamonds and worth by itself 20,000 crowns. The arrangement with the Duc de Mercœur in Brittany is at an end, so that all the princes of that country are now united with His Majesty.

575. Spanish Fleet against England
                            Rome
                            November 9, 1596.
    Spanish letters on the 15th October announce that 15,000 Castilian and Portuguese soldiers embarked in Lisbon harbour on the 9th inst. in 122 large ships and galleys with a large store of provisions and ammunition to sail for Ireland. The brother of the Earl of Tyrone from Ireland is said to be accompanying this Armada. It is all directed against the Queen of England.

576. Its Captures
                            Venice
                            November 22, 1596.
    The only news from France is that the King there is still pressing the Queen of England for 4 millions in gold to carry on the war with Spain. But it will be granted him only if he pledges Boulogne.
    Spanish letters announce that the Spanish Armada has captured on the voyage to England 7 English vessels, 4 from Syria with spices and 3 with sugar. They have chained the crews to the galleys.
    It appears that the English envoy followed the Sultan to his camp in Hungary and is working hard for peace between His Imperial Majesty and the Grand Turk. But the conditions are too severe for the Emperor.

577. The Turks in Hungary
unknown
4 November
background: Statement of the Bey captured by His Sacred Majesty before Keresztes and examined at Kaschau on November 4.
    He says he was Bay at Weissenburg for seven years and Aga of 3000 janissaries at Fünfkirchen for two. He is now taking part in this campaign. He says that with his master, Osman pasha, he waited on the Grand Turk who was quartered a few miles from Erlau on September 18. There he was asked by the Turkish Emperor what Colonels and commanders the Roman Emperor had in Hungary. He told him this, and then the Sultan had a long conversation about peace negotiations with the English envoy and Viziers. The Grand Turk was strongly urged towards peace by the English envoy but dissuaded by the Beglerbey of Greece and the son of Sinan Pasha.

578. The States General at Meaux
                            Venice
                            November 30, 1596.
    Letters of the 15th from Lyons announce that the King and the entire Court have left Rouen for Meaux for the meeting of the Estates there. The Ducs de Montpensier, Mayenne, Nemours, and Guise and the Constable de Montmorency and other great gentlemen of the Kingdom have proceeded there also. In addition to these the envoys of England, Scotland, Denmark and the States General were expected to negotiate the fresh alliance against the King of Spain.
italics: Henry of Savoy, Duke of Nemours, 1572-1632, at first an adherent of the Holy League, then reconciled with Henry IV. Finally he fought against Savoy without success. But his chief occupation was the composition of ballets which he caused to be performed at his country house.

579. Brescian and Milanese Munitions for Spain again
                            Venice
                            December 6, 1596.
    A distinguished nobleman of Seville, who came there from Milan, is in the city. He narrates that between Brescia and Milan he ordered 12,000 hackbuts and 4000 pikes to take with him to Seville. Sixty guns are also being cast there, and the whole consignment must be ready next March. Munitions in Spain are very dear, and the King has recently been offered 7 millions in gold to lead his great army against the Queen of England and the rebels in the Netherlands.

580. King Philip defaults
                            Rome
                            December 7, 1596.
    Last Tuesday night four messengers from Genoa sent by the merchants there rode through here on their way to Naples. The same number are riding to the Netherlands and two to Milan. All this because the King of Spain is withholding payment of the money brought by the fleet, and requiring its use as a loan for the war against England and the Netherlands. The King will repay the money with interest in three years, or take it as an advance on the 30 millions promised him by the Kingdom of Castile for the English war. Genoa reports that there is consternation among merchants. Everything is in confusion and there will be many failures.

581. Food Scarcity in London
                            Antwerp
                            December 7, 1596.
    The Commissioners of the States General have returned from England. Apparently they would have liked to redeem Flushing and Briel. They were ready to repay Her Majesty the money she had advanced, but the Queen would not consent, and we hear from Amsterdam that envoys are to be sent to the Queen again this week.
    London reports of the 30th inst. state that some corn-ships have reached there safely from Amsterdam, but that the scarcity remains severe. Military preparations have slackened as there is no longer fear of the Spanish Armada.

582. Spanish Fleet for Ireland damaged in a Storm
                            Lyons
                            December 9, 1596.
    We hear nothing except that the Spanish Armada which was going to Ireland has suffered great damage in a storm. Twenty-eight ships and 4000 men are supposed to have been lost. The remainder has put back to Galicia and Biscay, and so many troops will again be raised in Spain.

583. English Cloth in the Low Countries
                            Antwerp
                            December 14, 1596.
    Some ships have arrived at Middelburg with English cloth and have already begun to sell it.
    They write from Zeeland that a Scotch Captain has been brought in prisoner to the Hague. Letters have been found in his possession which prove him guilty of having arranged with the Cardinal of Austria about the town of Veere, that His Highness should send 6000 Spaniards into the country. The whole thing was discovered through a Captain in the same town, who had received money from the Scotch Captain. He will receive the reward he deserves.

584. English Troops for Ireland, France, the Low Countries
                            Brussels
                            January 6, 1597.
    Letters from England report that this Queen has been in bed for some days, indisposed and seriously ill. She is closely guarded also, and only discusses business with her most intimate Ministers. In all directions she is raising troops and drilling, since she wishes to send them partly to Ireland, partly to France, Holland and Zeeland. A special vessel is being got ready in London to take an envoy to Denmark. The King of Spain wanted to send the Count de Barlaimont there, and the Queen wishes to prevent his despatch.
    All places in Zeeland and on the Baltic have been written to that the Spanish Armada has been damaged, and that no trade of any sort may be carried on with Spain on risk of ship and cargo being confiscated.
    All sorts of preparations for war are being hastily made in England, and merchant ships are even being used as warships so that the son of Don Antonio may take them to Spain as soon as possible.
    It is reported from Ireland that a general levy of the people is being made, and this causes great excitement. Although the Spanish General has suffered loss and only gets very slender assistance from foreign troops, the wild Irish join him in great numbers daily. In this way he does the English considerable harm. Moreover he is very overbearing and cruel to prisoners.

585. A Wet Winter
         Wheat brought to England from Holland
                            Antwerp
                            January 5, 1597.
    From London comes news that the rain lasts day and night and the country is waterlogged. The roads are in such a state that it is impossible to travel by carriage or on horseback. However, the English are not much afraid of the Spanish Armada, as preparations have been made by sea and land. Raleigh the corsair is to go to India with some ships and some other commander to the rich land of Guiana. Certain noblemen also are to sail.
    This week two Englishmen failed, William Bicker and George Lester. They owe a good deal of money, and ask, without offering sureties, for two month’s grace.
    The fleet is said to have reached Harwich from Staden with a quantity of merchandise and 1200 loads of wheat.

    Sir Walter Raleigh, 1552-1618. He played an important part at the Court of Elizabeth while quite a youth. During the Massacre of St. Bartholomew he was apparently living in Paris, since he fought in France on the Huguenot side from 1569 till 1576. In 1578 he made a voyage of discovery to North America, from 1580 to 1582 he took part in the suppression of the Irish rebellion, in 1584 he received from the Queen a Letter Patent authorizing the discovery and conquest of unknown lands, and went on fresh voyages of discovery to North America, where he found the colony called in honour of the Queen Virginia. In 1588 he joined with his own ship in the fight against the Armada and was afterwards repeatedly entrusted with important naval commands. In 1600 he became Governor of Jersey. On the accession of James I he was condemned to death for alleged conspiracy against the King, but was respited. However, from 1603 to 1616 he and his wife were imprisoned in the Tower. In 1616, by commission of the King, he conducted an expedition to Guiana, but on his return he was arrested on Spanish instigation and the sentence of death was carried out.

586. The Debts of Philip II
                            Rome
                            January 11, 1597.
    Letters of the 11th ult. from Spain report that an Irish envoy has arrived in Madrid and has been very well received by the King. He will presumably try to obtain help. The King has sent 1 1/2 millions to Italy by the galleys in which the two Cardinals were.
    The King has published by a new Edict that he means to pay his debts to the merchants, but that he desires an audit of their accounts and trade records since the year 1577. The money has been commandeered only because it has often reached his enemies and because of the great dishonesty of the Genoese. A list of His Majesty’s debts to gentlemen concerned is being distributed here, as follows:
                                   Crowns.
    Messrs. Francesco and Pietro Malvenda   .     800,000
    Ambrosio Spinola    .  .  .  .     400,000
    Vittorio Suarez .  .  .  .     170,000
    Nicolo Formano  .  .  .  .     600,000
    Nicolo Doria    .  .  .  .  .     100,000
    Spinola & Nigroni   .  .  .  .     900,000
    Fiesco & Giustiniani    .  .  .  .     800,000
    Sauli   .  .  .  .  .  .     350,000
    Messrs. Fugger  .  .  .  .     700,000
    Other private individuals in Flanders   .  .  1,300,000

1. Tension between Spain and England
                                    Rome
                                    June 12, 1568
background: News reaches us that the King of Spain has sent orders to the English Ambassador to withdraw at once to a distance of ten miles from Court. The reason for this, as many think, is that the Ambassador has had in his possession or has distributed certain pamphlets teaching the doctrines of the Huguenots. The Ambassador has obeyed the command and has without delay despatched his Secretary to Queen Elizabeth.
        John Man, Dean of Gloucester, 1512-1569, became English Ambassador
    to Madrid, 1567. Owing to alleged remarks about the Pope, he was banished first
    from Court, then from Madrid. Recalled from Spain, June 1568. A somewhat
    incapable diplomat.

2. Turkey, Arabia, and Egypt
                            Constantinople
                            September 28, 1568.
    The army of the Grand Turk has marched to the Red Sea in order to chastise the insurgent Arabs who have occupied Aden and Yemen. Whether this will be successful cannot be foretold. The Beglerbey of Damascus was sent on in advance to oppose the Arabs, but he dallied until they had captured the two most important fortresses. He was therefore recalled on August 26. He is powerful, rich, and has many good soldiers. Possibly he may have joined the rebels. It is stated that this has already occurred and that he intends to seize Egypt, as his wife is a daughter of the King of that country. Therefore 65 galleys have been already despatched to Alexandria to hold the people in check and prevent disturbances. When the fleet on its passage reached Cyprus it put into Famagusta to water and was well received by the Venetians. It is stated that the fleet is to return in October and that vigorous preparations are being made in the Arsenal, though with what object is unknown. To-day a canopy from Mecca was carried in solemn procession round the town here. It is intended for the grave of the late Soliman. The Turks paid it every honour, kissed it, and sang the Song of their Prophet Mahomet.

3. Rome on the alert against the Huguenots
                                       Rome
                                       January 29, 1569.
    There is no news of importance to report this week from this Court. However, the Spanish Ambassador, who returned from France on Sunday evening, brings tidings that His Majesty of France is informing His Holiness that the rebels and Huguenots have risen to great power by help of the Queen of England. It has been discovered just lately that she has sent to them at La Rochelle several cargoes of provisions and munitions and 3000 English soldiers to fight for the German League. The Duke of Zweibrücken is sending the Prince of Orange several thousand horses, so the King has given his brother the Duke of Anjou 400,000 francs to train and pay the army and march by January 15 against Condé, who has retired into the passes of Lorraine.

4. English Raiding and Trading in Spain
                                Seville
                                February 11, 1569.
    I have heard here exactly what the English have been doing in New Spain. A Fleming, who has been acting as interpreter to them there, writes that they have sailed into all harbours in the mainland, have sold their wares in part amicably, in part by force, and have pillaged all they could. They are said to have carried off property to the value of 600,000 ducats. Here this is considered to be an exaggeration. Still the amount is estimated at 3 or 400,000 ducats. Accordingly, all English here were arrested the day before yesterday, but released yesterday on bail. The same course is to be followed at Cadiz and San Lucar also.
        The espisode alluded to is the raid of Sir John Hawkins (1532-1595), who
    had descended upon the Spanish colonies the year before. On this expedition 
    Hawkins lost many of his comrades. To obtain their liberation he entered into
    negotiations with the Spanish Ambassador to England, Don Guera des Espes, and
    offered to enter Philip II’s service himself. The King and his ambassador were
    taken in and handed over the prisoners. But Hawkins did not keep his promise.
    He became later Treasurer of the English fleet, fought successfully against the
    Armada, and died at sea on one of his expeditions off Porto Rico.
footnote: See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 4, Piracy of the English.

5. Spanish Ships and Gold brought into Plymouth
                                London
                                March 4, 1569.
    Twenty-two ships from Spain and Lisbon have recently come into the port of Plymouth here. Others are said to be on their way. These ships were brought in by force. They contain amongst other things spices and a Spanish Mission. The latter has arrived in London. Every day the Spaniards ask permission of the Court to journey with the despatches to Flanders. They bring little news from Spain. The Beggars at the Exchange here announce that the Moors have taken half Granada, but the Spaniards to not admit this.
    For some time the Spanish Ambassador was escorted by a guard, but this has recently been dispensed with. The Beggars dislike this, for they would prefer that open war should break out between Spain and England. About one hundred Spanish sailors are here, most of them begging for alms. But those who go to Meeting-house get their fill of fish and white bread.
    The Spanish gold now here is said to come from Plymouth, ninety-five chests of it as well as another fifty-four which ought to have got to Antwerp. It amounts all in all to nearly £100,000. What the Queen will do with it time will reveal. It is said that new coins are to be struck from it. Such of this money as belongs to the merchants Her Majesty is gracious enough to allow to be changed in Antwerp, but what belongs to the King of Spain, her brother, she thinks it right to withhold from the Duke of Alva.
        The Beggars. In April 1566 about 250 Netherlands nobles, who had 
    bound themselves under a covenant known as the “Compromise” to resist the
    encroachments of Philip II, presented, under the leadership of Louis, Count of
    Nassau, and Henry, Count of Brederode, a list of grievances to their Regent,
    Margaret of Parma. As the Regent showed signs of alarm, one of her 
    councillors named Berlaymont exclaimed: “What, Madam, is your Highness 
    afraid of these beggars (ces gueux)?”  The name was adopted and the insignia
    of the Beggars or Malcontents became the wallet and bowl with the motto:
    “Fidèle au Roi jusques à la besace.”  The first rebellion was crushed by Alva, but
    in 1569 the Prince of Orange placed himself at the head of the party and formed 
    the Gueux de Mer, or Sea Beggars. Their capture of Flushing and Brill in 1572
    was the beginning of the War of Dutch Independence.


6. Spain and the Moors
                                          Madrid, May 15, 1569.
    The Captain-General of Castile, with twenty-three, or some say twenty-four, galleys on board of which are some Italian soldiery, put out to defend the sea against Barbary. But he encountered such a storm that four galleys and two pinnaces seem to have been lost with all hands. The rest have been so mauled and scattered that it is uncertain where they all are. It seems however likely that they will be unseaworthy for the present. The Captain is reported to have arrived at Palamos with two or three galleys. It would appear to be a judgment of God, for certain soldiers coming from the Kingdom of Naples boasted loudly that they would drive off the Moriscos. Now Andrea Doria has been written to  to come at once with his galleys. God grant that in this manner the Moriscos may be reached.
    A report is just now current, that the English with a few strongly armed ships have descended upon the small town of Ferrol, situated in Galicia, not far from Corunna, and have made away with or slaughtered the whole population. The English are stated to have announced that they are now sailing to India to wipe out and avenge upon the Spaniards the shame and loss recently suffered at Vera Cruz.

        Fernando Alvarez de Toledo, Duke of Alva, 1508-1583, Spanish states-
    man and general. Philip II sent him to the Netherlands to deal with the unrest 
    there. Alva carried out his task with such cruelty that resistance only became 
    more violent, so in 1573 he was recalled. In 1580 he conquered Portugal for
    Spain.

        Giovanni Andrea Doria, Prince of Malfi, Spanish Admiral, d. 1606.

7. Piracy in South America
                                          Madrid, May 26, 1569.
    A recent but unfounded rumour here has it that the inhabitants of Cusco in Peru have revolted. However, I hear nothing so far about this from Seville. On the 21st the Indian Council published the news from Seville that a passenger arrived there from Santo Domingo relates how Don Melendez has captured from the corsairs in Guiana and Porto Rico three ships and a quantity of silver too, looted along the coast. I have been unable to learn whether the pirates were English or French.

8. The Turks arm against the Arabs
                                  Constantinople, August 22, 1569.  The Grand Turk is to hold his Court at Adrianople this winter. The Arsenal is very hard at work, as the Turks wish to use their full power against the Arabs next year. They have regained Aden from the Arabs. The Governor is a Portuguese turned Turk. The Arabs are struggling hard to get Aden back again. The Sophi’s son-in-law went on a pilgrimage to Mecca with his wife and five hundred retainers. He was attacked by the Arabs and most of his retinue was slain, though he himself and his wife escaped. The Grand Turk has apologized to the Sophi, expressing regret that his disorderly subjects should have done this.
        Sophi, the vulgar name for the Shah of Persia. See note on 425.

9. Treasure Ships reach Spain
                                Madrid, October 1, 1569.
    News has just come from Seville that the fleet of eight sail arrived safely from the Spanish Main at San Lucar on September 28. These eight ships are supposed to be bringing 340,000 ducats for the King, and over one and a half millions in gold for merchants and private individuals. It is hoped that an additional fleet will arrive next April, as many vessels which have made the Indian voyage are still due. The two fleets which came from New Spain and Peru this year brought in more than three millions, and this knowledge and desire. The French write that their King Francis, owing to the tricks played on him during his reign by the English, always had on his lips the following epigram:
        ‘Anglicus, Anglicus est cui nunquam credere fas est,
             Tum tibi dicit ave, tanquam ab hoste cave.’

In like fashion she summoned Brederode the Walloon to appear before her and broke faith on this occasion also.
    The real reason for this expedition and the further damage it will cause we shall soon learn. May the Almighty protect us from still worse things!

        Henry, Count von Brederode, 1531-1568. First of all in Spanish service
    in the Netherlands, then one of the most violent opponents of Granvella, and one 
    of the leaders in the revolt against Spain and of the Beggars. He was one of the 
    iconoclasts and died in exile, outlawed in perpetuity by Alva. His property was
    confiscated.

12. Rebellion in Chile and Peru
                                    Seville, July 29, 1570.
    Concerning the Spanish Main, a ship has arrived from Havana and on it a passenger from Cartagena. He brings the unwelcome news that in Peru and Chile, that is to say the more distant settlements, numbers of people have rebelled owing to the severe taxes and imposts inflicted upon them daily. Moreover, they are furious because they are forbidden to plant vines, olives, corn, and the like. Also all that they have been cultivating for some years past has been set on fire and destroyed. It is the King’s will that all such articles should be exported from our own country and sold there, in order that his revenue and taxes both within and without the land may flourish exceedingly. The King was not a little put out that they should have thus presumed to be contumacious. This news at the present juncture is very bad, but not surprising, for if the load of a beast of burden is added to daily without regard to his strength but with thought of profit alone, he will lose heart and fall. Certain people who, except for the tribute in gold and silver which they pay to the King, desire to be free of all taxation, and have consequently often taken up arms against the King, walk freely abroad here, their only desire being to enrich themselves by war and disorder.

13. The Queen of Spain in the Low Countries
                                Antwerp, August 19, 1570.
    Last Monday the Queen of Spain was solemnly escorted into Nimeguen, but the ceremony was I hear less splendid than was said. The Duke of Alva forbade any gentleman of this country to take part in the tourney or jousting. This was reserved for the Spaniards. So our gentlemen were displeased. Subsequently she passed on to Breda, and is to arrive to-day at Bergen-op-Zoom and there await a favourable wind.
    Yesterday letters came from England announcing that the Queen there is arming busily, and over thirty ships are said to be already fitted out. Further preparations for war appear to be made daily. What her intentions are in all this time will show.

14. She is escorted by an English Fleet
                                Antwerp, October 7, 1570.
    The English fleet which escorted the Queen into Spanish waters has returned home again. It is said to have left Her Majesty on Thursday, September 28, and the English declare that there is no doubt the Queen has already reached port, as she then had a strong favouring wind.

15. More Tension between Spain and England
                                Antwerp, February 3, 1571.
    It is announced as certain that the dispute between England and these countries is as good as settled and that Tomaso Fiesco may go over any day to make final arrangements with the Queen.
    According to letters however which arrived here on the 20th of last month, the Queen has ordered all property belonging to subjects of the King of Spain to be sold. Moreover, she has commanded her Ambassador here to leave everything standing and proceed to England, for she declares that she sees that the property belonging to Spaniards is being filched from her by means of Orders and the like. Where the truth is in all these tales time will show, as so many lies are told daily on ’Change that it is wearisome to write of such things.

        This may mean Sir Thomas Gresham, 1519-1579, a well-known financier
    and founder of the Royal Exchange. His father before him, Sir Richard, was Lord
    Mayor of London and Court Banker to Henry VIII. Sir Thomas was always 
    entrusted with the raising of loans for the English Court, and spent most of his life
    at Antwerp. On Elizabeth’s accession, Cecil, a business friend of his, came into 
    power, and this greatly increased his influence. Sir Thomas carried through some 
    very difficult and complicated transactions for the Court, and supported the 
    Revolt in the Netherlands out of his own pocket. The Antwerp Exchange served
    him as a pattern for that of London.



16. Would that we had Peace!
                                Antwerp, March 3, 1571.
    I hear they are busy in England returning the confiscated property. When they will have finished is uncertain. A sensible peace would be advantageous to both parties, as one country can hardly prosper without the other.

17. Would that we had Peace!
                                (No heading, no date.)
    According to a recent report the English have concluded peace with these countries. But methinks it has again fallen through, and nothing will come of it.

18. A Conspiracy against Queen Elizabeth
                                Antwerp, June 9, 1571.
    Yesterday fresh letters again came from England reporting that two Doctors, a Portuguese and an Italian, and likewise an Apothecary have been arrested for plotting the death of Cardinal Châtillon. They proposed to kill the Queen as well, so they will probably be treated with a carving knive.

        Odet de Coligny, 1517-1571, brother of Admiral Coligny, the first victim
    of the Bartholomew Massacre. He was excommunicated and fled to England, 
    where he actively supported the French Huguenots. He was poisoned.

19. The Alençon Marriage   
                                Antwerp, June 30, 1571.
    About the conspirators who poisoned the Cardinal de Châtillon I have heard nothing more. A man who came from England last week tells me they have been arrested more on suspicion than as being proved guilty of the crime. These people cannot be trusted. London letters of the 25th of this month state that the agreement between the Queen and our Court concerning the confiscated property is again afoot. God grant the property be soon returned to its owners. Marshal de Damville, brother of Admiral de Montmorency, is said too to be going to England to negotiate a marriage between this Queen and the brother of his King. But it appears that under this pretext he is to conduct other negotiations. A strange world!

        Henry I, Count of Damville, then Duc de Montpensier, 1534-1614, 
    Constable of France. His brother, Francis, Duc de Montmorency, 1530-1579, 
    favoured the Huguenots, and was sent to England in 1572, where he concluded
    an offensive and defensive alliance with Elizabeth. He escaped the Massacre of
    St. Bartholomew only by accident.

20. The Norfolk Conspiracy
                                Antwerp, October 27, 1571.
    London letters state that this Queen has again arrested many gentlemen and continues to do so daily. Amongst them is the Duke of Norfolk. They have been laying a fresh plot to kill the Queen, to proclaim a new King, to set free Her Majesty of Scotland and marry her to the newly proclaimed King. But the plan has failed this time, and several of them will lose their heads. To this nation will happen what befell the Frogs. They would not have the Log for King, and so the Stork was given to them and he ate them all up. What will occur next time will show.

21. Swedes and Muscovites
                                Danzig, July 20, 1572.
    In Moscow the scarcity is so severe that the Grand Duke has been unable to put more than a hundred thousand men into the field. Because of his tyranny the people are unruly. Last winter the King of Sweden treated them pretty roughly with thirty thousand men. Now in summer fighting is impossible, but in winter it can begin again.
    On an island near Narva the Swedes with a few thousand men have blocked all traffic and navigation, and quite recently drove back an English ship laden with cloth and salt. It has now arrived here in Danzig, bringing all its papers.
    Sweden, Poland and their neighbours have combined to stop all imports into Russia, so the Musdovite has sent the King of Denmark a quantity of money in order that the sea passage through the Sound may not be blocked. In consequence Imperial and Local Councils are to be held in Sweden and Denmark, and at Lübeck as capital of the Hanse Towns, to agree about access to Russia and to select with all due deliberation some suitable spot on the Baltic as market place and repository.

    Ivan the Terrible, 1533-1584.

    John III, 1568-1592.

22. Norfolk executed
                                Antwerp, September 5, 1572.
    Fresh communications from England announce that this Queen has caused the Earl of Norfolk to be executed.

23. The Vicissitudes of Trade                  
                                Seville, January 17, 1573.
    The officials of the Casa de Contractation are despatching with all speed news received last night that a small boat arrived from New Spain announces that the fleet which left here last July bound to that country reached there safe after a rapid voyage. But the harbour on the island of San Juan de Lua has been burnt down and the goods unloaded there, belonging to the merchants, have suffered damage to the value of seventy to eighty thousand pesos. There is always much labour and sorrow in traffic with New Spain.

24. Hopes of Peace between England and the Netherlands 
                                Antwerp, March 5, 1573
    This week an Italian has come from London who says there are strong hopes in England of effecting before long an agreement for at least two years between England and this country. The matter is said now to rest with the Duke of Alva alone. He sent a special despatch to the Ambassador in England this week. God grant that some such decision may be reached. It is also reported as quite possible that France may declare war upon England. Similar rumours come France, especially from Rouen, but there is no indication of the reason. If there is any truth in it all, the only reason possible is that the English favour the Huguenots.

25. Hopes of Peace between England and the Netherlands
                                Antwerp, April 19, 1573.
    Secretary Scharnberger writes from Nimeguen that our soldiers are now stationed in front of Harlem Lake. He reports also that in letters from London of the 10th inst. the treaty of peace between England and this country is confirmed. So we ought to believe that there is some truth in it, but until the treaty is proclaimed here I shall put no faith in the matter, as for some time we have been made game of over the news from England.

26. The Beggars
                                Antwerp, June 4, 1573.
    Twelve English ships arrived in Sluis this week, six laden with wool and six with cloth. Five more are said to have come in afterwards, of which the Flushing men took and carried off three not far from the Sleus. This is strange news, as nobody supposes the Beggars likely to attack the English. But they spare no man, and may regret this shortly. A letter from London dated the 1st inst. states that Lord Montgomery with his fleet has put into the Isle of Wight in England, but it is not reported that he has accomplished anything of note with his forces. Many messengers have come to the Duke from England during the last few days and his Grace has despatched a few to England in his turn. Moreover some English gentlemen, ostensibly on their way to take the waters at Spa, have waited upon the Duke of Medina Coeli at Maestricht. No doubt there is something in this. So it may almost be believed that the Queen of England will come to an understanding with our King, and will hand over to him a few ships for use against the Water Beggars. This will soon be known one way or the other, and I will communicate at once with your Honour.

        Gabriel de Montgomery, d. 1574, a French nobleman who mortally 
    wounded King Henry II of France in a tourney in 1559. He became a Protestant
    in England and fought on the side of the Huguenots. After the Massacre of St.
    Bartholomew he went to England, and from there led a fleet for the relief of La
    Rochelle in 1573, but he was forced to surrender to the French, and was beheaded
    by order of Queen Catherine de Médicis.

        John Louis de la Cerda, Duke of Medina Celi, d. 1607.


27. The Beggars
                                Antwerp, June 14, 1573.
    As I have already reported to your Honour, the men of Flushing took three ships from the English not far from Sluis. There is no doubt about this. But it is now asserted that they have been set free again. The day before yesterday an English gentleman arrived who is said to be an Earl and one of the bodyguard of that Queen. He likewise goes to take the waters at Spa. With this exception nothing worthy of report has occurred as regards England.
28. Rumours of War and of Peace
                                Antwerp, July 19, 1573.
    Fresh letters from England report nothing beyond that about a dozen warships are being fitted out there on pretence of clearing the sea of corsairs. I am informed, however, that they are really intended for our King. Of Lord Montgomery’s fleet and of his plans no particular mention is made. In France they feel sure of peace, but do not yet know whether it is officially confirmed in Paris.

29. English Money for the Low Countries
                                Antwerp, January 3, 1578.
    This week the Marquiws de Havré arrived in Brussels from England. He had a gracious farewell from the Queen and brings good news for the governments of these countries. Her Majesty has granted them a fresh loan of eight hundred thousand florins. This is confirmed in letters from London of the 23rd ult. M. de Havré brings a small amount with him in cash and a Royal Letter Patent or Authorization for the governments to raise the money on Her Majesty’s account. She gives her own guarantee, and in addition the Parliament and the City of London consent to pledge themselves as principal sureties to repay the money within a definite period. The general opinion is that there will be no lack of lenders, as investment on such security is safe. Should, however, none be found in this country, it is supposed that the government will send some one to Germany with orders to raise money there. We shall soon see what success the government will meet with. It will be necessary to remind them of their debt to Messrs. Fugger in order either to bring in the money or to get good security for it. God grant they may pay much of it off. We should then endeavour to put things in order for you and make a good profit. If we cannot obtain this security, and war should break out again with Don John of Austria, there will be serious risk of getting nothing back at the moment. May the Almighty deign that things grow better than they seem like to.
    They say the Queen is sending the government a regiment of English mercenaries, and has offered three months’ pay for them at her own expense. So there will be plenty of men on both sides and the only question is which paymaster will hold out longest.

        Charles Philippe de Croy, Marquis de Havré, 1549-1613, one of the 
    leaders in the Revolt of the Netherlands against Spain. He was commissioned by 
    the governments of the Netherlands to negotiate with the Queen for her support of
    the Revolt. In 1578 he went over to the Spaniards, and in 1594 represented the
    Circle of Burgundy at the Diet of Ratisbon and exerted himself greatly to promote
    peace between Spain and the Netherlands.

        Don John of Austria, 1547-1578, a natural son of Charles V. Under his
    leadership was gained the great victory of Lepanto over the Turks at sea on
    October 7, 1571. In 1576 Philip II made him Governor of the Spanish 
    Netherlands, and there until his death he fought with varying success against the
    insurgents.



30. Don John of Austria and the English
                                Antwerp, February 1, 1578.
    Of fresh news we have little here that is pleasing. The English Ambassador recently came to Brussels to get speech with Don John. But His Highness refused to grant him audience or even to speak with him, on the ground that he knew what his King’s orders were and that the Englishman had better return from whence he came. The authorities of Brussels would have to be informed on his behalf that he would manage to give them their just reward. According to the English Ambassador Don John proposes to visit Brussels on the twenty-fifth. The English Ambassador started back to London yesterday. What the Queen will do after she receives his report will not long remain unknown. God grant that all may pass off better than it seems like to.

31. Don John of Austria and the English
                                Antwerp, February 16, 1578.
    Two days ago there came over another English Ambassador sent by that Queen. Of his mission nothing can be learnt, but it is said that he goes back home in a few days. It would seem that most of the English and Scotch, who were to come to aid this country, have remained behind in England. Apparently this Queen has little desire to incur great expense unless some towns on the Flanders coast are pledged to her. It may be imagined that this Queen will think twice before she sends a refusal to the King of Spain.

32. The King of Spain asks too much
                                London, March 18, 1578.
    Don Bernardino de Mendoza, Ambassador of the King of Spain at the Court of our Queen, is said to require Her Majesty to assist the King of Spain in reducing his subjects in the Netherlands to due obedience again. She is also expected to lend money to th4e aforesaid King. The Ambassador requires moreover that divers galleys, which His Majesty proposes to despatch to the Netherlands, should in case of bad weather be permitted to put into English ports. The answer is not yet known.
    The Marquis de Havré immediately on arrival was received graciously in audience at our Court, far more graciously than the Spanish Ambassador. Our Queen at once caused to be drawn for him credits on the City of London to the total of £100,000, and Her Majesty is said also to be providing a considerable sum in cash.

        Bernardino de Mendoza, Spanish savant and diplomat, was entrusted by
    Philip II with important missions to France and England. He left behind him a
    quantity of scientific writings, and died blind as a monk in a Spanish monastery at
    the beginning of the seventeenth century.

33. Troops assembling
                                Antwerp, March 24, 1578.
    I myself have seen the Palsgrave John Casimir’s stabling for three hundred horses. The Queen of England will contribute her share also. Schwarzburg brings into the country two thousand men for the government, the Marquis de Havré fifteen hundred. In all, with Schenk’s men, there will be nine thousand. Stabling and pay-money are already provided.

        John Casimir, Palsgrave of the Rhine, 1543-1592, took a German army to
    reinforce the Huguenots and supported the French Protestants and the Revolt in 
    the Netherlands. He busied himself about an alliance between England and the
    Netherlands, and, with English support, led auxiliary troops against Don John of 
    Austria. As Elizabeth refused further payment, he went in person to England, 
    where instead of money he received the Order of the Garter. Later on he hesitated
    between Catholics and Protestants, but ultimately joined the Protestants in the
    Empire and was a dangerous opponent of the Catholic Hapsburgs.

        Adolphus, Count von Schwarzburg, 1547-1600, a German soldier, fought 
    first under Philip II in the Netherlands and under Henry III against the Protestants,
    and later with some credit against the Turks.

        Martin Schenck von Wydeggen, soldier of fortune in the Netherlands War
    of Liberation, b. apparently in the forties of the sixteenth century. In 1580 he was
    successful on the Spanish side, but in 1585 he entered Dutch service and
    conducted the war in the harshest and most grasping manner. In 1589 he tried to
    surprise Nimeguen but was driven back and drowned in the Waal.

34. The Queen seems to lean towards the Protestant side
                                Antwerp, March 25, 1578.
    Yesterday two ships with the Scotch, who escaped the most recent defeat at Namur, passed through here on their way to Brussels. They had come to England through France and were re-equipped and rearmed by the Netherlanders in London. The Marquis de Havré is said to have written from England that the soldiers recruited in Scotland and England are ready. But their despatch awaits the arrival of the German troopers sent to the government here. This forenoon a messenger came to the Prince from the Queen of England, with news that an Ambassador has arrived in England from Spain, and that the Queen is reporting his business to the Prince. The rumour is that without the knowledge and advice of the Prince the Queen will give no answer to the request of the Spanish Ambassador.

        Don John of Austria, reinforced by his nephew Alexander Farnese with
    20,000 veterans, routed the Netherlanders at Gembloux near Namur on Jan. 31,
    1578.

        Prince. The Prince of Orange.

35. But she will not be lavish
                                Antwerp, April 5, 1578.
    We have just this moment heard from England that this Queen will send over no soldiers and only money enough to recruit for the Palsgrave Casimir five thousand horse and nine thousand Swiss. A portion of these is said to have been raised already and Ernst von Mandelsloh on the Palsgrave’s behalf is to negotiate with the government. The Marquis de Havré is still at the English Court, and the Queen is to assist the government of this country with £150,000. On the 1st inst. again a ship with Scotch mercenaries passed here for Brussels.

        Ernst von Mandelsloh was Colonel in the service of Albert, Margrave of
    Brandenburg, by whose orders he brought a regiment to the Prince of Orange. He
    fought long in the Netherlands.

36. No Hope of Peace
                                Antwerp, April 23, 1578.
    Although a meeting to negotiate peace has taken place at Malines and several envoys of the government were present, there is no hope of a favourable result, for the Ambassador of the Queen of England has come here from Don John with very bad news. He will soon report to his Queen and the Parliament. As for Spain, we hear from Madrid on the 5th of this month that on the last day of last month Secretary Escobedo was stabbed riding home from Court. So far it is unknown who did it.

        Escobedo was Private Secretary to Don John of Austria. Antonio Perez, 
    1559-1611, Secretary of State to Philip II, had Escobedo murdered with the 
    King’s approval for threatening to betray the intrigue of Perez with Princess 
    Eboli. Because of his overbearing character Perez ended by falling into disfavour 
    with the King and fled to Saragossa in Aragon, outside the jurisdiction of the
    Inquisition. The King tried nevertheless to bring him before the Inquisition, but a
    formidable revolt broke out at Saragossa in consequence. Perez fled to France 
    and later to England, where he vehemently supported the policy of hostility to
    Spain.

37. Don John is outspoken
                            Antwerp, the last day of April, 1578.
    Monsieur de Havré has again come here from England. The Queen there is said to have agreed to all that the government wants, and the English Ambassador who was with Don John has again gone from here to England. He will inform the Queen that Don John intends, if successful, to bring her realm just as completely under the subjection of the King as the Low Countries. He stated as much in public.
    The six hundred English soldiers, who came over here lately, have gone to Flanders. Another five hundred of these men are encamped around our town. They came here two days ago from Zeeland and are also being taken to Flanders. Three thousand more are daily expected from over sea. Their Colonel arrived yesterday. So the government are collecting a considerable army, and are said to be ready to put up a permanent camp again by the middle of May, as Herr von Schenk’s nine hundred troopers have already arrived, and are to pass by the town to-morrow. They are to be followed within two days by their Colonel and an additional three hundred horse. Count von Schwarzburg’s two thousand five hundred horse are also expected daily. They are to arrive by Whitsunday at latest. At the same time Eitel Henry of Brunswick is to enter the country with three thousand horse for the government. But when the Palsgrave john Casimir will appear is not yet known here. They say the Queen of England is sure to be ready to pay three thousand horse and six thousand foot of his contingent.

        Eitel Henry, Count von Kirchberg of the House of Brunswick, German
    soldier, fell in the Cologne war, 1583.

38. Letter of Queen Elizabeth to the Archduke Mathias

(Original in Latin.)

    Elizabeth by the Grace of God Queen of England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, to the Illustrious Prince and Lord Mathias, Archduke of Austria, Governor of the Netherlands, Our beloved friend and relative, Greeting. We believe that you know how deeply We feel and must always feel that Our own destiny depends on the peace and prosperity of the Netherlands. We have therefore always striven for it and are ready to do so now, for there is no nation on alliance with which We have a more ancient or more pressing claim than on the Netherlands. Also there is no people which, owing to the favourable situation of its country and to other conditions, more greatly requires Our friendship than the Netherlands, for they have with Us all business and affairs in common. This has caused that We, in this most unhappy war, have beheld with pain these Provinces devastated, and We find it seemly that We should send to Your Excellency and to His Government these distinguished gentlemen, to wit; Henry Cobham of the highest nobility and Warden of the Ports and Our Privy Secretary Francis Walsingham, that they may devote themselves to the matter of making peace. In so far as is possible their desire is to smoothe away difficulties and to bring the affair to a happy conclusion. We beg Your Excellency therefore to receive these Our Ambassadors with the graciousness which is natural to you, and to show them in every detail not less confidence than you would were We to speak of the matter face to face. Tell Me frankly what Your Excellency holds conducive to the public weal of the Provinces. We wish Thee most gracious Lord and most Noble Excellency a very long life.
    Given at Our Residence at Greenwich on the 31st6 of May 1578 in the twentieth year of Our reign.
                    Your good cousin,           
                                ELIZABETH.

    To the Most Illustrious Prince and Lord Mathias, Archduke of Austria, Governor of the Netherlands, Our Most Beloved Friend and Cousin.

        Sir Henry Cobham, 1538-1605, an English diplomatist of distinction.
    Ambassador in Paris, 1579-1583. He tried hard to place Don Antonio on the
    Portuguese throne.

        Archduke Mathias of Austria, 1557-1619, subsequently Holy Roman
    Emperor, son of the Emperor Maximilian II, lived on constant bad terms with his
    brother, Rudolph II. During the disturbances in the Netherlands the Duke of
    Aerschote and the Marquis de Havré invited him to assume power there in place
    of Don John of Austria. Without the knowledge of the Emperor he went to the
    Netherlands, but had to share his authority with William of Orange. He returned
    to Austria in 1580. Subsequently he fought against the Turks without success, 
    and as the Emperor was now mad, combined with the other Archdukes to depose
    him from the hereditary dominions.

        Sir Francis Walsingham, 1530-1590, as a young man took a five years’
    educational journey through Europe, and, after the accession of Elizabeth, was
    elected to Parliament. In 1570 he was sent to Paris to assist Sir Henry Norris, the
    permanent English Ambassador, and to support the cause of the Huguenots. He
    soon became permanent Ambassador himself and concluded an offensive and
    defensive alliance with France in 1572. During the night of the Bartholomew 
    Massacre numerous English took refuge in his house. He was succeeded by Dr.
    Dale in 1573. From that time onwards he became a responsible Secretary of 
    State, sharing the whole burden of State affairs with Cecil. His chief attention 
    was devoted to foreign policy, and in this he received powerful support from 
    Leicester. By desire of the Queen he was also frequently employed in Scotch
    affairs. His greatest efforts were given to the discovery and suppression of the
    plots against the Queen’s life, and he was specially concerned in the execution of
    Mary Stuart. Before the Armada sailed his spies in Spain were particularly active
    and successful. Walsingham died in great poverty because the Queen invariably
    omitted to reward him in accordance with his deserts.

39. English Money again
                                Antwerp, May 28, 1578.
    Three days ago some uncoined gold and silver sent by the Queen came over from England. It has been taken into the English House and is to be minted there. The amount seems to be uncertain. Some think it to be about £100,000, but I do not estimate it at above a quarter of this. It is probably recruiting money for John Casimir’s troopers and a month’s pay for his infantry.

40. More Troops
                                Antwerp, June 11, 1578.
    M. de Bossu with twelve hundred horse and twenty-seven companies of foot has gone to meet the German cavalry and to escort them into this country. They will be close here in a few days. The government want to take their infantry out of the towns and erect near Brussels a permanent camp for which great preparations have already been made. They are collecting eight thousand horse besides the Palsgrave John Casimir’s five thousand which will soon be here with him together with eight thousand foot as well. It is said that His Serene Highness is to become Commander-in-Chief of the entire army of the government on the express wish of the Queen of England. She is to send over several gentlemen and a Secretary to remain with the government during the war.
        Maximilian Hennin, Count de Bossu, General, first in Spanish service, 
    then in that of the Prince of Orange, d. 1578.




41. Lord Howard arrives at Antwerp
                                Antwerp, June 28, 1578.
    Lord Howard, Ambassador of the Queen of England has arrived here. He was received with great ceremony and escorted in by Count Egmont, the Prince de Chimay, Monsieur de Merode, and by representatives of the City of Brussels. His Serene Highness our Governor sent four horses of his Bodyguard to meet him. Immediately on his arrival the Ambassador informed John Casimir in the name of his Queen that he was commissioned to assist him in the impending war by word and deed.

        Charles, Lord Howard of Effingham, Earl of Nottingham, 1536-1624,
    Lord High Admiral of England, received the Order of the Garter in 1574 and in
    1587 was made Lieutenant-General and Commander-in-Chief of the Fleet against
    Spain. His second in command was Sir Francis Drake. In 1596, when the
    Spanish danger threatened afresh, he again received the supreme command, while
    Essex was to command the troops on land. Until his death Lord Howard was in
    the highest favour with the Queen and with her successor.

        Philip III de Croy, third Duke of Aerschote, Prince of Chimay, 1526-1595,
    played a great part in the revolt against the Spaniards, became Governor and 
    Captain-General of Flanders and fought against Don John of Austria. He 
    submitted to the King of Spain in 1579. His son, Charles de Croy, fourth Duke of
    Aerschote, 1560-1612, married a Calvinist and from 1582 kept the name of Prince 
    of Chimay only. He became Captain-General of Bruges, re-entered Spanish 
    service, was made Captain-General of Artois by Archduke Albert, and finally 
    became President of the Belgian States General, and Duke of Croy. He left very
    interesting memoirs.

        Philip, Count Egmont, b. 1558, son of Count Lamoral Egmont executed
    in 1568. At the beginning of his career he was an enthusiastic adherent of the
    Netherlands Revolt, but went over to the Spaniards in 1579. In 1580 he was
    captured by the insurgents and kept a prisoner till 1585. When liberated Philip II
    made him a Knight of the Golden Fleece and Governor of Artois. In 1590 he fell
    at Ivry fighting for the League.

        Bernard de Merode, b. about 1529, d. about 1590, one of the most zealous 
    participants in the conspiracy of the Netherlands nobility against Spain. He 
    fought with William of Orange against Granvella and Margaret of Parma, was
    outlawed in perpetuity, took Malines in 1572, attended the Congress of Cologne 
    in 1579 as Commissioner of the States General of the United Provinces, and died
    as Vice-Stadholder of Friesland.

42. Don John intransigent
                        Antwerp, the last day of August, 1578.
    Our representatives, who, together with the Embassy of His Imperial Majesty and of the Queen of England, were at Louvain, returned yesterday to Malines. They announce that the peace negotiations have entirely failed. The reason was that our representatives as well as the Imperial and English Ambassadors refused to enter into communication with the Ambassadors of Don John. However, I hear this evening that they have been invited to meet afresh. The chief difficulty is said to be that Don John will leave the country only on condition that his men receive three month’s pay, and this the government will not grant.

43. The English Representatives return home
                            Antwerp, September 28, 1578.
    The two Ambassadors of the Queen of England are to go back home very soon. The government have presented each of them with a handsome gold chain and hangings for one room, said to be worth together about seven thousand Rhinegulden. According to all accounts they leave in great content.

44. John Lesley, Bishop of Ross
                            Strasburg, December 24, 1578.
    Several days ago there passed through here a Scotch Bishop by name John Lesley, Bishop of Ross. He comes from Rome where he has lived some years. He has been also at the Court of His Imperial Majesty, and likewise with the Bishops of Bamberg, Würzburg and Metz. He had intended to go to Paris, but to pay one more visit on the way to the Duke of Lorraine. However a day’s journey from here, when he entered the town of Phalsbourg belonging to the Palsgrave George John, he was arrested and remains there locked up. This is said to be due to divers intrigues which have been traced to him. I have been informed that in this respect he is very cunning and that earlier he worked hard for the Queen of Scotland.

        John Lesley, Bishop of Ross, an accomplice in the Ridolfi plot and one of
    the most zealous, dangerous and indefatigable partisans of Mary Stuart. He left
    England in 1574 and went first to France and then to Rome, where he was 
    incessantly active on behalf of the imprisoned Queen. In 1578 he was sent by the
    Pope to work among the Catholic Princes for Mary Stuart. On this journey he 
    was arrested. Soon after he became Vicar-General at Rouen. In 1587 he would 
    have been allowed to return to Scotland but declined to do so and remained in
    France. He died near Brussels.

        Henry I of Lorraine, third Duke of Guise, Prince of Joinville, 1550-1588. 
    He was the most formidable and vigorous opponent of the Huguenots, the fighting
    head of the Catholic League, and one of the chief authors of the Bartholomew
    Massacre. In conjunction with Philip II he aimed at the French Crown and 
    thereby caused civil war in France. He induced Henry III to issue the Edict of
    Reunion. As he was becoming more and more dangerous to the King, the latter
    had him and his brother murdered at Blois, Christmas 1588.





45. The Prince of Orange intervenes
                                        (Abbreviated.)
    Points for consideration submitted by the Prince of Orange to the Government of the Netherlands and the answers which they made to him.
    First. The government are requested to decide in what manner the town of Breda can be restored to liberty. Answer. This matter is entirely left to the discretion of His Excellency.
    Second. His Excellency receives an exhaustive report of how ill the Queen of England takes it that the government have neglected to inform Her Gracious Majesty of the present condition of the Netherlands, although, as the government are well aware, she had offered them at all times advice and assistance. The Prince therefore considers it essential that a responsible person should be despatched to Her Majesty with a detailed account of all that has occurred since the arrival of Don John in the castle of Namur. This responsible person must also petition for a suitable sum of money, say one hundred and fifty or two hundred thousand crowns, since it seems as though money alone could avert further misfortune from the Netherlands. Answer. The Marquis de Havré is commissioned to report to the Queen on these matters.
    Third. It is necessary to equip and keep in readiness a large number of mercenaries on horse and on foot. Answer. Besides the six regiments which remain under their previous commanders, a regiment of Scotch and a regiment of English mercenaries, together with three hundred horse, are to be taken into the service. The Queen of England should be requested to put the Earl of Leicester in command and to send him over here. His advice will be followed in all points and an additional regiment of the Prince’s infantry will be placed at his disposal.

        Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, 1532 or 1533-1588, the well-known
    favourite of Queen Elizabeth, who made serious claims to her hand. In 1563
    Elizabeth wanted to marry him to Mary Queen of Scots. In 1585 he was 
    Commander-in-Chief of the English Expeditionary Forces in the Netherlands,
    but showed little capacity for leadership and was recalled in 1587.

46. Scotch at Ghent
                                Cologne, January 29, 1579.
    The inhabitants of Ghent have taken six companies of Scotch to guard their town. Of these five have entered the town and the sixth is billeted in a neighbouring hamlet. They have behaved so ill that they have been slain by the inhabitants.
    Duke John Casimir has gone to England with a small retinue. What he will settle with the Queen time will show.

47. John Casimir in London
                                Antwerp, the last day of January 1579.
    On the twenty-fourth of this month Duke John Casimir arrived in England and reached London the same night. The Queen has given orders that greater honour be shown to His Serene Highness than to any foreign Prince for many years. On the next day, the twenty-fifth of this month, His Serene Highness had an audience with Her Majesty.
48. Massacre of a Scotch Wedding Party
                                Antwerp, February 8, 1579.
    At Devermonde the cousin of Captain Tangerlos has married a Scotch Captain. The wedding was celebrated with the utmost pomp and magnificence and a tourney was held in addition. After the breakfast and festivities were over, the bridegroom had caused a magnificent banquet to be prepared five miles outside of town. At this also there was much joviality. When they were afterwards starting home and apparently had insufficient conveyances, the soldiers, about sixty in number, intended to guard the bridegroom, the bride and their friends, were all of them drunk and seized carriages from two or three countrymen. This angered the countrymen greatly, for they had previously suffered much from the insolence and violence of the soldiers. So they sounded the tocsin and all the countrymen from the neighbouring villages gathered together. When the wedding party saw this they retreated to the house where the banquet had been held. In spite of their resistance the countrymen in their fury rushed the house and massacred bridegroom, bride, their friends and the soldiers, as well as the Company of the Scotch Captain which was quartered five miles off. The countrymen are now some thousands strong and are making for the neighbourhood of Brussels.

49. English Soldiers kidnap an Abbot
                                Antwerp, March 28, 1579.
    On the twenty-fifth of this month the English dragged the Abbot of St. Michael’s here by force to the waterside, as he was coming from the Council and riding back to the monastery. Three ships were lying there with about three hundred of their comrades. When His Serene Highness heard of this he informed the Prince of Orange at once and demanded the liberation of the Abbot. The Prince went at once with his bodyguard to the waterside and ordered them to let the Abbot go. The soldiers refused. The Prince called up three or four warships stationed in the river off the town together with their Admiral, and let the soldiers know that he meant to have two or three falconets fetched from the Arsenal to bombard their ships if they did not set the Abbot free. So the English set him free without doing him any injury. In excuse they alleged that they had only taken him on to their ships because, during the fortnight which they had spent without cessation on board, they had been given nothing but butter, cheese, and bad beer. They wanted the Abbot to try their rations and out of compassion give them something better. After the Abbot was liberated he drove in the Prince’s coach back to the monastery and is somewhat indisposed from the shock.

50. The Austrian Court despairs of Peace
                                Prague, June 25, 1579.
    Here at Court hopes of peace in the Netherlands are very slender, particularly because conditions at Maestricht and other towns are so dangerous and grow so menacing with the spread of religious discord. They declare here that the marriage between the Duke of Alençon and the elderly Queen of England will be carried through.

        Francis of France, Duke of Alençon, brother of Charles IX, 1554-1584, 
    was head of the Catholic party in France, became, with Elizabeth’s support, Duke 
    of Brabant, but had finally to give up the struggle against the Spaniards.
51. The Alençon Marriage
                                Antwerp, July 25, 1579.
    In London letters of the 19th of this month it is reported that the Queen was taking a trip on the water with the Envoy of the Duke of Alençon, and that a shot was fired at the vessel as it passed. Whether it was intended for the Queen or the Envoy he can best tell who fired it and who has been arrested.

52. Portuguese Fears of Spain
                                Cologne, July 31, 1579.
    The Portuguese here have received letters from Portugal of the last day of June and the eighth of July to the effect that their King is very weak and that great scarcity of grain prevails in their country. Many also have died of plague. A great discussion has resulted among the Portuguese about this, since they do not wish to fall under Spanish dominion. The King has got rid of the Duke of Braganza and Don Antonio out of Lisbon by sending one of them to the Spanish frontier, the other to the opposite frontier. Don Antonio is said to have protested. However, he was obliged to leave Lisbon.

        King Sebastian of Portugal fell in the battle of Alcazar in 1578. He was
    succeeded by Cardinal Henry, who reigned till 1580. Don Antonio, Prior of 
    Crato, 1531-1595, was the natural son of John II of Portugal and a Jewess. He
    took part in the unsuccessful expedition to Africa, then returned to Portugal to
    assert his rights to the throne. With too small an army he fought against Alva
    without success, but kept up the struggle for the throne for a long while with
    French and English assistance. He died in great poverty.

    John, Duke of Braganza, 1547-1583.

53. Spaniards in Ireland
                                Antwerp, August 8, 1579.
    The affair of the Spanish invasion of Ireland is said not to be so serious as was recently stated. Apparently only three ships with seven hundred men have landed in Ireland, wild reckless folk under a leader who is a rebel out of Ireland. The Queen at once sent five well-equipped ships to the place, so there will not be any trouble.

        Nicholas Sanders, 1530-1581, a learned English Catholic. He studies at
    Rome and took an active part in the intrigues of English Catholics on the
    Continent against Elizabeth. He wrote a large number of uncompromisingly
    Catholic works, of which the best known is entitled De Visibili Monarchiâ
    Ecclesiae. He lived in France under the patronage of the Guises and then in
    Madrid with Philip II. The Papal Nuncio at the Spanish Court persuaded Philip
    to attempt a landing in Ireland, and Sanders was selected as Papal Envoy to
    Ireland. He was instructed to fight there in conjunction with James Fitzmaurice.
    In July 1579 he hoisted the Papal banner at Smerwick and the small Spanish 
    force held out against the English troops there for nearly two years. He was 
    joined by the Earl of Desmond. Sanders died finally a fugitive from the English
    soldiers.
        James Fitgerald Fitzmaurice, known as the Archtraitor, d. 1579, second
    son of Maurice Fitzjohn. He aimed at the creation of a strong party in Ireland
    hostile to the English. He was the prime mover in the great Irish rebellion which
    broke out in 1570. In 1573 he submitted to the English, fled in 1575 to Paris and
    the following year went to Spain. He left his sons Maurice and Gerald behind in
    Madrid under the care of Granvella, and sailed to Ireland in 1579 with Sanders
    and Mattheo de Oviedo, arriving there in July. Soon after he fell in a battle 
    against the English.

54. Spaniards in Ireland
                                Antwerp, August 22, 1579.
    The latest letters from England confirm the statement that the invaders of savage Ireland have already captured three fortresses and slaughtered the garrisons. The longer the invasion lasts the wider it spreads. Moreover, as the country is situated not far from Spain, perhaps that King will take more interest in it and give up his enterprise against Algiers. The Queen at first sent five ships there, and now another four. Also from the City of London and other towns she has despatched several hundred men. It is reported too that a bishop and some monks from Spain have arrived in Ireland, to convert the people. Many Irish are said to have joined them already.
    Yet another report has it that the Duke of Alençon has taken ship for England, and that the Queen has gone some distance from London to meet him. We must await the issue of the negotiations.

55. The Swedes attack and plunder Narva
                                Danzig, August 28, 1579.
    Yesterday an English captain came from Narva. He left his ship in the roadstead, came himself on shore for only a few hours, and then quickly went on board again to sail back to England. He relates that on the twenty-eighth of July the King of Sweden with twenty-three well-equipped ships arrived off Narva. The inhabitants were fairly delighted at this for they thought they were English, French, and Netherlandish merchantmen to whom they could sell their wares at a good profit. So part of the people ran from the town to the water’s edge to see who they were and when they would land. Some took boats to row aboard the ships. But when they got there the crews stabbed them and threw them into the water. Then a strong detachment landed. When the inhabitants saw that these were enemies they were terrified and ran towards the town with the Swedes after them. The Swedes then rushed and captured the German portion of Narva and slaughtered most of the inhabitants, although they had been ordered to spare the women and children. Then they crossed the water and took the Russian part of Narva also, except the castle which was within the town. As they had no time to loot, they set the place on fire and returned to German Narva which they cleared out completely. Their booty, amounting to several tons of gold, they quickly got on board. The King of Sweden’s Admiral in command summoned the English, French, and Low Countries merchants in Narva and reproached them with having supported the enemies of his King and master. They answered that they were merchants seeking their livelihood, and also that they had permits from the King of Sweden. When the Admiral saw these he said they were no use. He told them further that the goods they had already on board the ships lying in the river could remain their property, but anything in the town was forfeited. And he carried it all off to the great hurt of the Lübeckers. He said too that they must at once declare whether they wished to remain Russian, for if so they must go away at once. but if they were ready to serve his master the King of Sweden, then they could stay. To this they answered that they had come not to serve either the one master or the other but to seek their livelihood. However, when they saw that the Admiral was not satisfied with this, they declared that they would much rather serve the King of Sweden than the Muscovite. Upon this he at once put them into his army, so that they had to serve in the war against their will. Then he looted the town completely and set it on fire. The Englishman above mentioned had to help to set light to it. The town was burnt right down except for one house. The Englishman states that he got away at great risk to his life. He says the King of Sweden has taken so much booty that it will enable him to carry on war against the Muscovite for quite a long time.

56. Alençon going to England
                            Antwerp, August 29, 1579.
    The arrival of the Duke of Alençon in England is certain, but about his negotiations nothing is yet known. The Queen has sent a naval and military force of ten thousand men to Ireland, and five large warships on which alone are said to be two thousand men. She says her object is to check highway robbery, but there may be something else behind.

57. Henry IV takes Fuenterrabia
                            Antwerp, September 15, 1579.
    The latest letters from London of the fifth of this month state that the Duke of Anjou is expected in October with his entire retinue. The presumption is that something is afoot against Spain, for this very evening we learn during business hours from Lyons and Paris correspondents that the King of Navarre has surprised Fuenterrabia, a fortified town on the Spanish frontier, and occupied it with eight hundred musketeers.

58. Press Censorship
                            London, September 19, 1579.
    The Duke of Alençon has come to Paris sure enough. As it is supposed that next month he will be back here again a pamphlet has been issued against his marriage plans. After a few copies had been sold the printer was arrested, but the author has not yet been found. Although at first the people vehemently objected to this marriage and spoke openly against it, they now seem to have become quieter and less eager. From Ireland there is no definite news, except that soldiers are moving over there daily. Ten days ago we were told that seven hundred Spaniards or others had come to the aid of the rebels, but this is still uncertain. The English Ambassador has passed from Portugal to Spain to pay his respects to the King and protest against his having sent seven hundred men to Ireland. It seems that he did not deny this, and said that he was urged by the Grand Inquisitor to do in the interest of his own religion what the Queen had done in that of hers. Otherwise all is quiet. The merchants cannot come to terms with the Hanse towns about the Hamburg trade, and will not get their privileges restored.
    See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 19, Censorship.
59. French Sympathy with Henry IV
                            Cologne, September 26, 1579.
    The news about Fuenterrabia seems to be true, as the Duke of Terra Nova told Aerschote of it himself. The officer commanding the fortress appears to have fallen under the suspicion of the King of Spain because of the death of Escobedo, and so to have surrendered the place. It is thought here that the Spaniards will leave the Netherlands because they are finding enough to do at home, particularly it seems because the league between France, England and Portugal is making progress, and the Queen of England is fitting out forty ships. The Duke of Alençon is alleged to have promised to come to the assistance of the Portuguese if they should be threatened with war by the King of Spain. His brother, the King of France, is said, however, to be very ill, and if he were to die the Duke would not be able to leave the country easily. Nevertheless, he means to send the help promised and give aid to his brother-in-law, the King of Navarre, as well.
    Fuenterrabia, a village in the Spanish Province of San Sebastian close to Irun.
    Duke Charles of Aragon became Duke of Terra Nova in 1561, Prince of Castell-Vetrano in 1565, and Governor of Milan and Envoy to Germany on behalf of Philip II.

60. Dover Castle ready to receive Alençon
                            Antwerp, September 29, 1579.
    Again, I have no information about our military affairs. It is supposed in London that the Queen’s marriage is certain to take place. Dover Castle is being splendidly decorated for the purpose. It is however also asserted that the King of Spain is coming to England. But he is said to be making great naval preparations, and, though the ostensible object if Algiers, he is thought here to have designs on Portugal and England too.

61. A Setback for the Spaniards in Ireland
                            Antwerp, October 27, 1579.
    London letters of the tenth of this month announce that Parliament has been prorogued till February. Of the Queen’s marriage there is no more mention, but the news is confirmed that the Spaniards and the Irish rebels who joined them were surrounded in a wood by the Queen’s soldiers and the wood burnt down, Spaniards, rebels and all.

62. English Weather
                            Antwerp, November 1, 1579.
    We hear from England that there is fearful rough weather there with rain, heavy snow and unusual cold, such as has not been experienced for sixty years. In Ireland the English want not only to destroy the rebels and invading Spaniards utterly, but to drive out the Irish altogether, so as to take the country for themselves. Their warships are still there. Parliament remains prorogued till February and there is no further mention of the marriage.





63. Press Censorship again
                            Antwerp, November 22, 1579.
    Our English correspondent says the marriage plans of this Queen with the Duke of Alençon are going on. Parliament is to meet on the last day of this month. The Queen has cut off the hands of a nobleman and of another person of distinction who wrote and published a pamphlet. In the pamphlet it was stated that the Duke of Alençon was an enemy. Many of the nobility are upset at this punishment and have withdrawn from Court, so that it looks as though even in this country there might be a rising.
    
    John Stubbs or Stubbes was a very zealous Puritan who in 1579 published a protest against the project of a marriage between the Queen and the Duke of Alençon. He, his publisher Page, and his printer Singleton were condemned to have their right hands cut off, and the sentence on Page and Stubbes was carried out on November 3, 1579. When it was over, Stubbes waved his cap and shouted, “God save the Queen!”

64. The Portuguese Succession, the Princess of Eboli, Antonio Perez
                            Madrid, December 11, 1579.
    Secretary Antonio Perez has recovered from his illness and is said to be in good health. So far he has not again been deprived of his lodgings and many take this for a good sign. The Princess of Eboli continues still under arrest. About her, the Duke of Alva and his Secretary who is still in prison, silence remains unbroken. What the King will end by doing to them we shall see some day. At present no reliable information comes from Lisbon about what has happened over the election of a Prince, but it must come soon. Every one here declares that our King is to go to Seville next summer. If there is anything in this it is due to the Portuguese succession alone. Your Worship will hear about it in good time.

65. Death of the King of Portugal. Don Antonio and the King of Spain
                            Lisbon, February 3, 1580.
    On the thirty-first day of last month God the Lord called to himself from out of this vale of tears our Gracious King Don Henrico. At first this mournful occurrence caused no small panic among the common people, but mercifully there has been no disorder hitherto. God grant that peace may continue. Yesterday Don Antonio was here, but he appeared merely because he wants to be elected King. However, he met with little favour and went on at once to Almeria where most of his supporters are. It is to be feared that he will drag many a worthy man down with him to destruction. We shall soon hear whether the King of Spain is going to try to make himself King of Portugal by force. Up to now no news has come through, not even about what he is after with the army stationed around Seville. If he means to take the throne here he will give the Portuguese no time to get reinforcements or support from the French. There is so much talk that one does not know what to believe. Two envoys are said to be going to the King of Spain to try and get him to swear to recognize the man elected by the Cortes. But, as the King of Spain has hitherto not renounced his own claim, I expect he will not take the oath. He is sure to be unwilling to bear the heavy expense for his army to no purpose. The Portuguese, however, refuse point-blank to become Spanish, though I should like to know what they are going to do about resisting. They have not a single soldier in Portugal who has ever seen any fighting or would know how to lead properly. They have no arms for they lost them all in the African war. They have no money and there is fearful scarcity in the country. Moreover the plague is raging everywhere. Yet, with empty hands, they think themselves strong enough for the Spaniards.

66. Rather Turks than Spaniards
                            Antwerp, February 13, 1580.
    Some of the ships expected from Portugal have arrived and this is the news they bring. The Viceroy at Calicut in Portuguese India writes to Lisbon and other towns that they would rather have a revolution and would submit to Turkish rule more readily than to Castilian. So risings have taken place in three ports, which have declared for Don Antonio who is in exile.

67. Military Preparations in England
                            Antwerp, February 20, 1580.
    We hear from England that this Queen distrusts the Spanish fleet. She is having sixteen ships fitted out and six thousand men recruited in London. She has ordered also all men in the country to take up arms and make ready in case of need. Sixty thousand men are believed to be under arms already. In March Parliament is to meet, and all nobles who support the Crown are to be present, to consider negotiations about the marriage of the Duke of Alençon. But whether this meets the wishes of many English remains doubtful.

68. The Spanish Fleet, what is its Destination?
                            Antwerp, February 20, 1580.
    It is stated here that His Majesty of Spain has embarked six thousand pikemen for Biscay and that the great fleet is almost ready to sail. But where it is to make for is still unknown. The Queen of England, who perhaps has some information, has commandeered all ships in the country small and large and is fitting out all her warships in the utmost haste. Likewise she is calling up the whole population, so that she is supposed already to have collected eighty thousand foot and four thousand horse. Of these she is to send a portion to Ireland and she will also garrison the ports. Our presumption is that all Spanish naval preparations are intended for the Netherlands.
    A caravel from New Spain has reached Seville with six hundred arobas of cochineal on board. Another is to follow with a similar cargo. The Indian fleet is said to be bringing eight thousand arobas which will amount to a large sum of money.

69. Spain will get Portugal
                            Lisbon, February 26, 1580.
    To all appearances we shall not get off in this kingdom without some disorder, for I am credibly informed that Don Antonio is plotting in all directions. However, the struggle cannot last long, for all the best people here are in favour of Spain but dare not let it be seen. But when the King of Spain appears here with his army he will be better received than he expects. And he will rather surrender Flanders than this country. The ordinary man will not take this into account, moreover he believes that one Portuguese is worth ten Spaniards. I fancy the authorities set up in this country have an understanding with the Spaniards. I have no doubt that Spain will take possession of Portugal, as is fitting. I hope that then there will be better government and better business.

70. Alençon may be accepted by the Low Countries as Governor
                            London, March 5, 1580.
    It is still strongly rumoured that negotiations are being carried on about the marriage of our Queen with the Duke of Alençon, though representatives appointed by both sides. They say that, on conditions already settled, the Low Countries are ready to accept the above-mentioned Duke as ruler.
    Warships and an army as well have been made ready here against the Spanish fleet, but a few days ago they were dispersed, as it has been discovered that the Spanish fleet is only intended to make the King of Spain master of Portugal. The galleys and big ships of the Spaniards are no good for this country and even less for the Netherlands. The Spanish fleet still lies in various ports along the Straits of Gibraltar, and is in great confusion. There is also much mortality among the crews.

71. More Portuguese Bluster
                    (Original in Italian.)
                            London, March 5, 1580.
    Of the Spanish Armada we learn that the ships which came in on the first of February brought little cargo and that the fleet is still lying in various ports near the Straits of Gibraltar. A ship from Lisbon, which put in here in February, reports that the old King is really dead and that the King of Spain is spoken of as his successor, though he has not yet been proclaimed. The Portuguese Ambassador is still at this Court, and it is not thought that the King of Spain will be so readily accepted. He will meet with resistance and fears the strength of the fortresses in Portugal, Africa, Barbary, and at Calicut in Portuguese India. The Viceroy and the officers in high command declare that they would rather hand over their country to the enemies of our religion than to the Spaniards. Neither ships nor men are being got ready here, except for three ships destined for Ireland.

72. More Preparations in England
                            Antwerp, March 6, 1580.
    It is said that in England one hundred and thirty thousand men have been raised and enrolled for six months. For the first three months the country bears the cost, for the next three the Queen. If the King of Spain does not attack England, the Queen has thus no expenses to meet. The Queen has fitted out altogether sixteen of her warships and thirty merchantmen and many small yachts as well. In this country also naval preparations are to be made, and those of North Holland are already under way.

73. Talk about Alençon may be merely political
                            London, March 19, 1580.
    About our matrimonial plans rumour varies. Last week some nobles of the Duke of Alençon’s retinue arrived here. But we hear of no decision and it is conjectured that the whole marriage discussion has merely taken place because of the war in the Netherlands. Paris letters report that the citizens of La Rochelle have captured a Spanish ship bound for the Netherlands. The Spanish Ambassador has applied to the King for its release. In the ship were a hundred thousand Spanish double crowns, and all sorts of valuable merchandise. But the King has detained this ship on behalf of his brother the Duke of Alençon, so as to send the money to the insurgents in Flanders.
    We hear from Portugal that the decision about the succession was entrusted to the Pope, to His Majesty the Emperor, and to other Christian potentates. The Spaniards are successful in the war, but the war guilt must be laid to the account of the King of Spain.

74. La Rochelle takes some Spanish Gold
                            London, March 26, 1580.
    Nothing has yet been heard here of the Lisbon ships. But a ship has come in from San Lucar bringing letters of the fourth and fifth of this month to the effect that the fleet and likewise the army are arming and gathering about Cadiz. The Duke of Alva is in command, and it is believed that Portugal is the object. However, as the Portuguese are arming too and refuse so far to recognize the King of Spain, it is probable that the Spaniards will still hesitate to use force.
    Recruiting is to be recommenced in this country, no doubt to show the Spaniards that the Portuguese will not lack support.
    The same letters from San Lucar report that some ships from La Rochelle have captured the despatch caravel of the Indian fleet with some three hundred thousand ducats worth of gold, silver and pearls. Whether she comes from Peru or America is unknown. La Rochelle letters of the eighth of this month report that this ship came in with two others laden with sugar and other things. No decision can yet be got from the King as to whether these ships are to be regarded as prizes or not, so they are lying off the outside of the harbour and are still being treated as friends. But as the Spaniards in Florida have put Frenchmen to a miserable death, they will no doubt now have to pay for it. Our marriage is going backwards rather than forwards. Four more armed ships are to sally forth to deter the Spaniards from attacking Portugal. A Portuguese envoy is here and is on bad terms with the Spaniards, and it is thought that they are striving for war, in order to annex Portugal.

75. An Earthquake
                            Antwerp, April 16, 1580.
    The earthquake felt here, at Bruges in Flanders and also in Zeeland, was experienced on the same day in London in England as well as in France. Some towers and houses collapsed.

76. Don Antonio’s Prospects are poor
                            Lisbon, April 23, 1580.
    If  Almighty God averts it not we shall not escape without blows over the succession here. Don Antonio is surrounded by many worthless desperadoes of all nationalities, German, French, English, and is secretly hard at work recruiting abroad to bring foreign soldiers into this country. I have yet to hear that he has any adherents to speak of here among those of intelligence and position. A month ago the King of Spain wrote to Don Antonio and the Governor. He gave them twenty days to make up their minds. An envoy from the King of Spain has come over here to hear the answer but has not yet been received. A few days ago a servant of Don Antonio treacherously knocked down in the street Don Fernando de Pina, one of the most distinguished people here and a good Spaniard. If his escort had not protected him he would have been killed. Although the criminal fled to a monastery he was dragged out and imprisoned. The King of Spain is getting nearer and nearer to Portugal, and is said to have reached the last frontier town.

77. Civil War in France
                            Antwerp, last day of April, 1580.
    London letters of the twenty-third inform us that open war has broken out in France between the King and the Huguenots. Monsieur Valcour, member of the Council of War of Prince Condé, is said to have arrived in London to ask help from the Queen. Monsieur de Gitri has been sent by this Condé to John Casimir, to get him to prepare for a campaign in France. All those of the religion in Picrdy are joining Condé. He already has with him some hundred horse and a strong body of infantry. It is reported that the Duke of Alençon is mortally ill or even dead, and that he was poisoned. At Malines the soldiery has behaved very badly, and the town has had to promise the English troops fifty thousand florins to leave the place. Our city is making itself responsible for this amount, and important citizens of Malines have come here to give themselves as surety.

78. Malines and its English Garrison
                            Antwerp, May 7, 1580.
    They write from London in England on the last day of April that the Duke of Alençon’s envoy has arrived there and a second one is due. It is supposed that the marriage will come off after all. Alençon, too, is said to be less ill. He appears to have overheated himself playing tennis.
    Yesterday the English soldiers left Malines and were replaced by four hundred citizens from this place to protect the town. Besides them, there are in the place three companies of Scotch and other troops as well. When the English moved out of Malines, the inhabitants of the town fell upon them, wounded some and shot down others.

79. The Spaniards in Ireland again
                            Antwerp, May 14, 1580.
    Thirty Spanish warships with troops on board are stated to have appeared off Ireland. With the help of five of the Queen’s warships the country people seem to be offering determined resistance and to have sunk three of the largest Spanish ships. The remainder are surrounded, so that they cannot get to shore, and it is hoped that not one of the Spanish warships will get away till English reinforcements come into Ireland. The English are said to have captured all the fortresses in Ireland and almost the whole country and to have killed the fortress garrisons.

80. The Portuguese want help against Spain
                            Cologne, June 24, 1580.
    A Portuguese ambassador has come to Antwerp bearing despatches to the Prince of Orange and the Government. He is said to have brought with him letters of credit to a large amount to purchase and send to Portugal armour, powder and all sorts of other munitions of war. Subsequently he is to go to England as well, to do the same there too. His request to the Prince and government is being kept secret, but it is probable that he will ask for help in both quarters. The general opinion is, however, that the trouble between Portugal and Spain will end peaceably, more especially as in Portugal there is much scarcity and the mortality is heavy.

81. But the Spaniards are in Portugal already
                            Antwerp, August 13, 1580.
    A small boat that left Portugal on the twenty-sixth of July brings news from there that the Spaniards are already in the country, and that the Portuguese are done for, unless they get foreign help. But, according to London letters, news has reached there from Paris, that Philip Strozzi has gone to Portugal with four thousand French and it is supposed that England will also send some troops there. But it should be remembered that, with all this delay in sending aid, the King of Spain will be able to do what he likes with the Portuguese.

    Philip Strozzi, 1541-1582, Colonel-General of French infantry, led the French fleet against Spain on behalf of Don Antonio and fell in the sea-fight off the Azores on July 26, 1582.

82. The Papal Flag in the Irish Sea
                            Antwerp, October 8, 1580.
    They write from England that seven shiploads of troops have appeared off the Irish coast. Some say they are Spaniards, others that they are two thousand Italians sent by the Pope. They bear two keys on their flags sure enough. So the Queen of England has had her fortresses and ports garrisoned and forbidden sailings to Spain.

83. Energetic Measures for Defence in England
                            Cologne, October 13, 1580.
    In England six thousand foot and sixteen ships are being got ready for Ireland. The Queen has stopped all ships bound from England for Spain, Lisbon and other places, and is arming energetically against Ireland. Three thousand soldiers are assembled at Biscaya for daily shipment to Ireland. Smoke is now rising yonder that will choke many before it is damped down.

84. A False Alarm
                            Antwerp, October 15, 1580.
    The news from Ireland last reported was false. It was only a herring fleet. All the talk arose because it was taken for an enemy.
    
    See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 35, Ireland.

85. An English Envoy intercepted
                            Cologne, October 20, 1580.
    The people of Bleibuir have taken prisoner and placed in the castle there an English Envoy who had gone to Prague on his way from Antwerp to His Imperial Majesty.
86. The Return of Drake
                            Cologne, October 20, 1580.
    Our Antwerp correspondent assures us of the return of the English Captain Drake, who is a pirate and has been away for three years. In India, which belongs to the King of Spain, he has stolen two millions in cash, has passed through the Straits of Magellan and come back ho9me. If this is true many pirates and adventurers will follow after him.

    Sir Francis Drake, 1540-1596, the renowned English sailor and circumnavigator, made and expedition to Guinea with Hawkins in 1567, and in 1570-1571 embarked on what may be called experimental voyages for his big voyage in 1572 to the Spanish-American ports. He sailed round the world from 1577 to 1580, and was knighted by Elizabeth in 1581. In 1585 he led his fleet against the Spaniards and captured the Cape Verde islands, sailing on from there to San(to) Domingo and Florida. In 1586 he came home and in 1587 made his famous voyage to Spain. In 1588 he fought against the Armada, and was in command of the fleet in 1589 which was to help Don Antonio to gain his throne of Portugal. In 1595 he made a fresh voyage to the West Indies, but with less success than on former occasions. On this voyage he died off Portobello.

87. Inventory of Cargoes from India

Cargoes of four ships from Calicut in India which arrived at Lisbon in August—
                                            cwts.
    Pepper, all sorts   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  20,777
    Cloves  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    2,863
    Mace    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       343
    Nutmegs .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       444
    Cinnamon    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       248
    Ginger  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       203
    Ginger for preserving   .  .  .  .  .  .  .       600
    Tufted cloves   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       470
    Indigo  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       235
    Wax .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       235
    Resin   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .         27
    Raw silk    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .         87
    China silk  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .         1.2
    Incense .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .         3.2

                                            arobas
    Amber   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  2,826
    Small pearls    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1,696

17 ships from New Spain are bringing—
                                            ducats
    for the King    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .         600,000
    for merchants   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .      1,100,000
      Hides .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .         100,007
                                            arobas
    Cochineal   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     6,000
    Cinnamon    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .        407

The fleet from Peru and the Main is to bring—
                                            ducats
    for the King    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .      1,500,000
    for merchants   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .      4,500,000

88. Elizabeth is not to be trifled with
                            Antwerp, November 12, 1580.
    On the report that four English ships have been confiscated in Spain the Queen of England has had four Spanish ships confiscated at Plymouth. It is believed that Spain is holding up the ships because of Captain Drake, who arrived in London a few weeks ago with a quantity of bullion. A year ago he attacked the ships on their way from New Spain, and the King of Spain demands that he be sentenced.

89. She refuses to see Mendoza
                            Cologne, December 1, 1580.
    They write from England that the Queen has forbidden the Spanish Ambassador, Don Bernardino de Mendoza, to come to Court. The Queen is said to have sent an envoy to Spain for the purpose. Why this has happened is unknown.

90. Drake’s Gifts to the Queen
                            Antwerp, December 3, 1580.
    English letters of the twenty-sixth of last month say that the Spaniards and Italians in conjunction with the Irish rebels built a fort and hoped to get hold of some ships. But these latter were surrounded by the Queen’s forces, driven ashore and sunk. So there need be no more anxiety about them. Again the news from London is confirmed that Drake the English pirate has presented the Queen with several horses laden with silver and gold from the booty which he got two years ago off the Peru ships. This Drake is said to be again proposing to make a raid on the Peru ships and to try his luck afresh.

91. Spanish Prisoners from Ireland
                            Antwerp, December 24, 1580.
    Letters from London in England of the tenth of this month not only confirm the defeat of Don Antonio but also report his imprisonment. He has been taken to Valladolid. As concerns the Irish war it is correct that of the Spanish and Italian invaders five thousand have been slain. On the twenty-fifth and twenty-eighth they were brought to London as prisoners, among them a few officers. But these were liberated for a small ransom. At the castle of Smerwick seventeen prisoners were hanged. Earl Desmond, a rebel, came to reinforce the Spaniards and Italians with six thousand Irish, but arrived too late.
    The following are said to be among those brought to London:  Signor Sebastiano de San Josepho, General of the Italians, Alexander Mestre de Campo, a Spaniard, Don Antonio Ortage of Biscaya, Signor Stefano Palosimo, Conrado Pandolfo, Erdusso, Francesco Angelico, Alexandro Severo, Signor Fabian Lucas, and Josefo Fabian.

92. They are ransomed
                            Antwerp, January 1, 1581.
    The last letters from England report that the Queen has thrown the brother of the Duke of Norfolk and two of the nobility into prison for conspiring against her. The prisoners brought to London from Ireland have been liberated for a ransom of 20,000 crowns.

    Philip Howard, first Earl of Arundel, 1557-1595, eldest son of Thomas Howard, fourth Duke of Norfolk. He was implicated in the conspiracy of Campion the Jesuit against the Queen, and therefore fell under suspicion. In 1584 he turned Catholic, and in 1585, when attempting to flee the country, he was captured at sea and kept in the Tower for many years. In 1589 he was accused of high treason and practice of the Catholic religion in the Tower and condemned to death. He died in 1595, it is alleged by poison.

93. Defeat of Don Antonio confirmed
                            Cologne, January 20, 1581.
    The Italian letters tell such different tales that little that is reliable can be gleaned about Don Antonio. What the local Portuguese hear seems more like the truth. They are informed that he and his adherents, after being routed by the Spaniards near Oporto, embarked on an English ship at Vianna, in order to sail to France or England. But they could not do this owing to contrary winds, so they left the ship perforce and went to Galicia by land. They were overtaken and robbed by Spanish soldiers. The Spaniards made no mention of their death, fearing to be deprived of the loot. This news has lately reached the Portuguese from Antwerp and meets with universal credence. So there is little need to fear the reappearance of Don Antonio and the other rebels.

94. Turmoil in Scotland
                            Antwerp, January 21, 1581.
    There are said to be political disturbances developing in Scotland. The Queen of England has sent troops and £20,000 in cash to Lord Hunsdon, Governor on the Border, so that he may invade Scotland with a large force in favour of the young King. This force is directed against Aubigny, a Catholic and a Frenchman, though of Scotch origin. He has gained control of the person of the young King, and taken the Earl of Morton prisoner in bed, as he was sleeping above the bedchamber of the King. This was accomplished with the aid of certain Frenchmen. The Queen of England is very eager to have the Earl of Morton set free and to suppress the rising. The Queen has summoned Parliament to meet in London on the fourteenth of this month.
    
    James Douglas, fourth Earl of Morton, born 1530. He was Chancellor of Scotland and chief agent in the assassination of Rizzio. After the reconciliation of Mary Stuart with Darnley he was deprived of his office. In 1567 he returned to Scotland, and it is uncertain whether he had a share in the murder of Darnley. But in any case he promoted the marriage of Mary Stuart with Bothwell. On Oct. 24, 1573, he was chosen Regent of Scotland with the support of Elizabeth, so that English influence in the country became paramount. For alleged participation in Darnley’s murder he was condemned to death and beheaded at Edinburgh on July 2, 1581.

    Henry Howard, Earl of Northampton, younger brother of Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk. He was implicated in the conspiracy of Norfolk on behalf of Mary Stuart. After Norfolk’s execution he attempted to gain the favour of the Queen. He was repeatedly imprisoned for seditious writings, and was a zealous supporter of Essex. Under James I he was in great favour and became Warden of the Cinque Ports.

    Henry Carey, first Lord Hunsdon, 1524-1596, English diplomatist and soldier. By desire of Elizabeth he frequently intervened in Scotch affairs with success. In Scotland he was repeatedly entrusted with the most important and difficult negotiations, and was a member of Alençon’s suite on his journey to Antwerp.

    James VI, King of Scotland, as James I, King of Great Britain and Ireland, 1566-1625. He was a son of Mary Stuart and Lord Darnley. The life of this sovereign, especially in his early years, was influenced by the struggles between Catholicism and Protestantism, and the partisans of France, Spain and England.
    On July 29, 1567, he was crowned King at Stirling, and James Douglas, Earl of Morton, held the Regency. In 1570 the Earl of Lennox undertook the education of the child. In 1578 Morton was forced to abandon the Regency, but soon returned to power till 1579 when Esmé Stuart, nephew of Lennox, arrived in Scotland. Morton strove for the friendship of England, but Stuart was an emissary of the Guises. Stuart became Duke of Lennox, James Stewart, his creature, Earl of Arran. For alleged complicity in the murder of Darnley, Morton was executed in 1581. Between Lennox and James a serious conflict developed in 1582, and in the raid of Ruthven James was captured by the Earl of Gowrie. James became definitely opposed to Lennox and his favourite Arran. Lennox fled to Paris and soon afterwards died there. Arran lost his power and fled to St. Andrews, where he was supported by the enemies of Gowrie. James recalled Arran in 1583, and Gowrie and his confederates fled to England. In a letter to the pope in 1584 James announced that he meant to adhere to the Protestant religion, but asked for help for his imprisoned mother. In 1585 James received from Elizabeth the offer of an alliance with England and a yearly pension of £5000, and this he accepted, whereupon Arran fled. After the condemnation of Mary Stuart to death he asked for pardon in vain. In 1588 Huntly and Maxwell wished to take the Spanish side, but James remained true to Elizabeth. In 1589 he married Anne of Denmark. In 1591 a fresh struggle bro9ke out between him and a nephew of his mother’s third husband Francis Stuart, to whom he had granted the title of Earl of Bothwell. In 1592 disorder broke out in Scotland owing to a supposed alliance with Spain. In 1594 James fell out with Huntly, who left Scotland. In 1596 a revolt broke out in Edinburgh against the King, and he left the town and escaped to Linlithgow. In 1599 there appeared a letter to the Pope stated to be by James, asking for the promotion of a Scotch bishop to the Cardinalate. After Elizabeth’s death he left Edinburgh and made a Royal entry into London. His hostility to the Catholics caused the Gunpowder Plot, and his vacillating character rendered him unpopular with the nation. To his son, Charles I, this was fatal.
95. Don Antonio escapes from Portugal
                            Chimenes, January 24, 1581.
    To the Worshipful Lord Philip Fugger, Lord of Kirchberg and Weissenhorn, my gracious Cousin.
    Worshipful most Gracious and Well-loved Cousin!
    To my Lord may my most obedient and willing service and my best efforts be assured all the days of my life.
    I desire not to fail to report to my Cousin of affairs here in Portugal. Don Antonio has been living in want and in the clothing of a boor. With the aid of some Franciscan monks he has contrived to embark at Bayonne (Bayona) on a Venetian ship which was to have taken in cargo. But when he got on board the sails were at once hoisted and the ship put to sea and went they say to France. The merchants and cargo were left behind. Those who helped him each received a gift of seven thousand crowns. No sooner have we now peace from Don Antonio than our Lord God scourges us with the plague which is here deeply rooted. May the Almighty deign to avert this punishment.
    All the days of my life I am my Lord Cousin’s most obedient cousin.
                                       CHRISTOPHER THANNER.

96. Spanish Plots in Scotland
                            Cologne, February 2, 1581.
    They hear at Antwerp that the rising in Scotland has been brought about by Spain to prevent the Queen from helping the Low Countries. It is also stated that the King of Spain wants to arrange a marriage for the Queen of Scots when she is let out of prison. All this is baseless conjecture. It is announced too that six weeks ago Philip Strozzi had assembled four thousand French at Nantes and put them on board thirteen or fourteen ships, giving out that he was going to the aid of Don Antonio in Portugal. It is supposed that he has invaded Scotland with them, though no news has come in since his departure from Nantes. But, if he has sailed for Scotland, the Low Countries government will be suspicious of the Duke of Alençon. The Queen of England has summoned Parliament for January 20. It is said that Parliament is to select a ruler for the country and that the Queen is to make known who will ascend the throne after her death. The next letters will tell us more.

97. Demand for the Release of Mary Queen of Scots
                            Cologne, February 3, 1581.
    According to reports from Antwerp the Irish rising is far from being as completely quelled as the English say. Besides in Scotland a fresh collision has occurred between Catholics and Protestants. The Catholics demand that the English Queen should release the Queen of Scots from her long imprisonment and freely allow her return to her own country. The English declare that no one but the young King of Scotland shall ascend their throne. Thus considerable discord may arise between the two kingdoms. It is also reported that the Scotch have captured and beheaded their English Viceroy and that Strozzi and his troops have entered Scotland from France, in spite of his having said that he was taking them to Portugal.


98. Projected Alliance with France
                            Paris, March 3, 1581.
    The ambassadors for England are waiting here till the money and other articles they require can be collected. Monsieur Brisson, President of the Parliament, is to accompany them. The object of the mission, according to universal belief, is merely a renewal of the old alliance formed between the two crowns in 1572. Time will show whether there are to be any other negotiations. The other envoys to England are the old Monsieur de Lansar, Monsieur de la Mothe Fénelon with a Secretary sent by the King, and Monsieur de la Vigne with a Secretary sent by the Duke of Alençon.

    Bertrand de Salignac, Marquiws de la Mothe-Fénelon, d. 1599. Well-known French diplomatist, entrusted with the most important negotiations between France and England.

    Barnabas Brisson, 1531-1591, Advocate-General under Henry III, President of the Parliament of Paris 1580, sent to England about the marriage of the Duke of Alençon, author of the legal book known as the Code Henri III.

99. Projected Alliance with France
                            Antwerp, March 4, 1581.
    Letters from London of the twenty-fifth of last month state that the French embassy was very well received by this Queen. It is thought that it only came about the Duke of Alençon or perhaps to form an alliance against Spain.
    The Queen’s troops are already on the Scotch frontier, but it is hoped that the dispute between the Scotch and their captive Regent will be settled.

100. War Taxation
                            Antwerp, March 15, 1581.
    Letters from England of the 11th inst. say nothing of affairs in Scotland. Those savages in Ireland have got the aid of certain Scotch savages, and the Queen has taken the necessary measures. Parliament in London may be prorogued any moment. Numerous bills have been passed and taxes voted higher than for many a day.

101. Mutiny of Scotch Troops in the Low Countries
                            Antwerp, March 24, 1581.
    As the Scotch regiment stationed in the fortress of Villebroek has received no pay for eleven months it has mutinied, driven its officers away and made an arrangement with the enemy. Since it was impossible to pay the men at once they were arranging to hand the place over to the enemy for a sum of money. Because the whole of Brabant and the city of Brussels in particular was exposed to great danger by this, and the citizens of Brussels had not money enough to satisfy the Scotch, the Grand Council here voted a new tax last Sunday to wit 25 stuiber per barrel of wine and 4 stuiber per barrel of beer. Altogether the town raised 10,000 carlins in cash and with the tax already voted it will be possible to pay all the troops.


102. James of Scotland a Protestant
                            Paris, April 1, 1581.
    Our embassy for England is still at Calais waiting for a favourable wind and for the Dauphin, son of the Duc de Montpensier. He is to leave here in two or three days; and besides him other nobles and the Duc de Bouillon’s two young gentlemen are to go. So this embassy grows more distinguished.
    The English assert that the Scotch have set their captive Regent free again. The King of Scotland has proclaimed by edict that he will live and die in the Calvinist religion in which he has been brought up, and that he will not tolerate Catholicism; but the Scotch say otherwise.
    The English also declare that a plot has been formed by the Jesuits, Catholic nobles and other persons, whom the Queen has imprisoned. One important gentleman has fallen away, abjured the Roman faith and been set at liberty. The others are still in prison. In a word the English have a horror of the King of Spain and do not trust us here overmuch either.

    François de Bourbon, Duc de Montpensier, 1539-1592, a very brave soldier who fought against the Huguenots and became Governor of Normandy. Till 1582 he was called the Count Dauphin.

103. The Scotch Troops still mutinous and still unpaid
                            Antwerp, April 15, 1581.
    The Scotch at Villebroek are still mutinying. They have an arrangement with the enemy at Louvain and Aelst. The day before yesterday emissaries were sent them with some money, but I fear they will not be content with so little. Negotiations are in progress to get them out of the fortress, but I gather to no purpose. They refuse to move unless they receive arrears in full, but this is impossible. Things have got so far that they want to cut through the canal from Brussels so as to surround the town on one side with water and block the way to Louvain. When the Scotch have gone, citizens from Antwerp and Brussels are to replace them in the fortress. Not more than two months pay is owing to the Scotch. Their Colonel Stewart and their Captains cannot come near them; they have been driven away. The English Colonel Norris, commanding in Friesland for the States General, is here now. He has been owed a good sum for a long time and is now demanding payment.

    Sir William Stewart lived during the period between 1575 and 1603. He was a soldier and diplomatist and held a command in the Netherlands. He intrigued with the Spaniards on behalf of Mary Stuart against James of Scotland.

    Sir Edward Norris, Governor of Ostend, had long been in command of the English troops in the Netherlands, d. 1603.





104. French Embassy in England
                            Cologne, April 27, 1581.
    Antwerp letters of the 22nd inst. say that the French embassy reached England 450 strong. It is conjectured that the marriage of the Duke of Alençon with the Queen is to be negotiated. The Queen’s preparations in England seem to be magnificent. Such a triumphal entry into England has never been seen. She has had a special house built for the banquet. The rooms in the Palace are said to be so covered with gold and silver hangings that every one is amazed. In Antwerp it is impossible to get gold and silver cloth enough. All that comes in is sent to England. What exactly will be the end of it God only knows. The Queen has forbidden on heavy penalties any mention of the decisions in Parliament. Many think that an alliance between Her Majesty and the Crown of France is to be concluded.

105. (1)  The Norfolk Conspirators
                            London, April 29, 1581 (1).
    Since amongst other things you ask for information about what has been done to the prisoners arrested four months ago, you should know that the brother of the last Duke of Norfolk and two knights are still in prison. This because they have again become reconciled to the Roman Church, having been led thereto by certain agents instigated for the purpose by the Pope. This is taken very ill in the country. There is a suspicion too that they have been plotting against the crown and realm of England. But, as hitherto nothing has been brought home to them, they remain in prison, simply because they are in bad odour. The Earl of Oxford, also arrested but soon set at liberty, is again in the Tower for forgetting himself with one of the Queen’s Maids of Honour, who is in the Tower likewise. This in spite of his having a pretty wife, daughter of the Treasurer. But he will not live with her.
    In Scotland Aubigny, a French gentleman of Royal blood and cousin of the young King, has usurped the government and thrown the old Regent, Earl Morton, into prison. On the pretext that the Regent caused the death of the King’s father, he is trying to draw the people to himself. All Earl Morton’s clan, the Douglas’, have revolted against him, and called in English aid.

    (2)  More about the French Embassy
                                            (2.)
    Some distinguished representatives of France, many nobles and some legal experts are here. What they are after is not yet clearly proven. The French give out that they are negotiating the marriage of the Queen with the Duke of Alençon. Others declare that they are here to effect a firm alliance between the French crown and the Low Countries to be under the direction of the Duke of Alençon. This would concern England too, as it could only be accomplished with the previous knowledge, good will and permission of the Queen. She has promised to lend the French £200,000 if they give her the town of Calais so that she may make use of it in the Low Countries War. The French are also to swear to preserve this alliance between the Queen and the Low Countries.
    It is thought too that something could be arranged against the King of Spain to help Don Antonio who is living at Mazagan in Barbary. Don Antonio has despatched an envoy, a Count, in priest’s clothes to the French Court. He is to prepare ships to bring back Don Antonio. On the 1st inst. the Azores were still holding firm for Don Antonio and rumour went that these islands and the Calicut district of India could be captured if help were brought them betimes. So war must be looked for there also. In our parliament no decision has yet been reached. Only some Portuguese business has been set in order.

    Thomas Howard, fourth Duke of Norfolk, son of the executed Earl of Surrey, 1536-1572. Under Elizabeth he pretended to be an adherent of the Established Church, but worked in the interests of the Catholic party, hoping to become the husband of Mary Stuart. Cecil, however, discovered his project and had him imprisoned. When released he continued his intrigues, was convicted of being in league with Philip II, imprisoned afresh and beheaded on June 2, 1572.

    Archibald Douglas, eighth Earl of Angus, 1525-1588. He took part in a rising against James VI in 1584, was pardoned in 1585, and in 1587 received the title of Earl of Morton.

    Edward de Vere, seventeenth Earl of Oxford, 1550-1604, played an important part as Elizabeth’s Court when quite a youth. He was a relation of the Norfolks, had large estates, was very eccentric, and was arrested because of a duel in 1581. He fell into great money difficulties, was a very gifted poet and musician, and married as his first wife Anne, eldest daughter of Cecil, Lord Burleigh.

106. A younger English Bride to be found for Alençon
                            Antwerp, April 29, 1581.
    Letters from England of April 22 announce the arrival in London on April 21 of the French Embassy to the Queen. It was received in audience the very next day. We are told that the Queen had with her a young lady who was called by every one her cousin and next heiress to the English throne after the Queen’s death. But now it is said to be evident that she is a daughter of the Queen whom she had by N.N. So a marriage is to be arranged between this young lady and the Duke of Alençon. this cannot long be kept secret.

    Presumably Arabela Stuart. See note on 151.

107. Is Elizabeth in earnest?
                            Antwerp, May 6, 1581.
    London letters of April 29 are to hand and the only mention made of the suit of the French embassy is that some still believe in a marriage between the Duke of Alençon and the Queen, but that others doubt it. Some declare that the French offer to cede the town and port of Calais on condition of the Queen advancing £200,000, now equal to a million ordinary thalers. This would facilitate the execution of French projects against the malcontents. We shall soon know whether, as some conjecture, the Queen intends to conclude an alliance with France and the Low Countries against Spain.


108. Anxiety about Alençon
                            Cologne, June 1, 1581.
    News reaches Antwerp from England that for a whole week nothing has taken place in London but banqueting and jousting and that certain French gentlemen have returned home. It looks as though the Queen even now wanted time for reflection, and the long absence of the Duke of Alençon causes her much anxiety. The belief is that he will betray the Low Countries and come to an understanding with Spain. It appears too that some people in Antwerp are beginning to be afraid of him for they do not talk nearly so big as before.

109. A Hostage kidnapped
                            London, June 10, 1581.
    Yesterday one of the secretaries of the Prince of Orange came here. By instruction of this Prince on the 5th inst. at eight o’clock, outside the lodgings of the Spanish ambassador and in presence of the ambassador’s servants and with the assistance of a halberdier, he took away a boy of eleven. This boy was the son of a Dutch sea captain and with the knowledge of the Prince of Orange had been delivered to the Spanish ambassador as a hostage. On the 5th inst. the captain was to have handed the town of Flushing over to the Spaniards and malcontents. But the intention merely was to draw the malcontents into a trap, so all preparations had been made in Flushing. The Spanish ambassador had paid over to the captain 5000 crowns in advance. The malcontents had been warned in time. It is doubtful whether the Duke of Alençon has been here lately. Nevertheless many negotiations have been carried on this week and the French seem to be satisfied. But what will come of it is still a mystery. The Duc de Bouillon and his brother left here three days ago, the other Frenchmen are to follow them to-morrow.

110. The French leave, laden with Gifts and Promises
                            London, June 17, 1581.
    The French envoys have left well satisfied and laden with gifts. It seems that the marriage has been determined on, but that the Queen wants a little more time for reflection. The alliance appears to be concluded and the Duke of Alençon is perhaps more set upon it so as to be able to carry through his plans in the Low Countries, and thus to be honoured by his brother, feared by the Spaniards, and proportionately loved by the Netherlanders. The envoy of the Duke of Alençon still remains here. Captain Drake is beginning preparations and is also fitting out some of the Queen’s ships for a voyage to India. The Azores are being provided with all necessaries from here. It is said that some Portuguese nobles have arrived.

111. The French leave, laden with Gifts and Promises
                            Paris, June 14, 1581.
    Our embassy has returned from England, only La Mothe Fénelon and an envoy of the Duke of Alençon remaining behind. As to results all that is said is that much money has been spent and the alliance renewed on unfavourable conditions. The Queen did not show them much confidence but was busily negotiating on the other hand with the King of Spain.
112. Don Antonio in London, Alençon to go to the Low Countries
                        London, July 15, 1581.
    Don Antonio of Portugal is still here. He sometimes goes to Court and receives visits from the Court. This week a ship came in here from the Azores and reported that those islands still adhere to Don Antonio. Six thousand men are gathered on the islands and 400 French are expected there. From France it is announced that the Duke of Alençon is arming heavily. He is said to have arranged with his brother in Paris who is lending his aid. Many Huguenot gentlemen are to go to the Low Countries with Alençon. They also learn that the nobles in Normandy are riding to support Alençon. This week at Court here a violent quarrel broke out between the Earl of Cecil the Grand Chamberlain and the Earl of Leicester over a question of precedence. The Queen has commanded both to remain within their houses and is striving to make peace.

    William Cecil, Lord Burleigh, 1520-1598, the well-known English statesman and confidential adviser of Elizabeth.

113. Drake laying in Stores
                            Cologne, July 20, 1581.
    From Antwerp a quantity of munitions of war is being taken over to England and bought there. They say that within a few days over 300,000 feet of fuse was sent there, also that besides the ten first ships yet another ten are to be equipped. With these the pirate Drake is to sail to India to loot. It is stated too that some ships have arrived off the Azores from Brazil to take in water, and they have been held up there. This is Antwerp news; if there should be anything in it we shall soon learn from Lisbon and Spain. On the 13th inst. letters came to Antwerp from England with tidings that nothing yet is known for certain about Don Antonio.

114. Don Antonio’s Plans
                        Antwerp, July 29, 1581.
    The latest English letters from London dated 22nd report that Don Antonio is buying a lot of fine ships to form a fleet to send to the Azores. The Queen of England is said to have given Don Antonio the port of Southampton and to have garrisoned it with troops. On the 23rd inst. Secretary Walsingham was due to go to France, to convey the Queen’s answer to the questions submitted to her for consideration six weeks ago. They say a definitive alliance will be concluded.

115. Don Antonio’s Plans
                        London, July 29, 1581.
    Every day many Portuguese notables come to Don Antonio here. He has with him now over thirty nobles of the best families. This week 50,000 crowns were brought to him by a Portuguese from France. It looks as though he were having some ships fitted out in France, to be used both here and for the voyage to the two Indies. They say he is having fifty ships equipped here. Don Antonio lives in a palace and it seems as though he would stay here for a long while yet.


116. Spain alarmed about Alençon
                            Antwerp, August 12, 1581.
    The ambassador of the King of Spain who has been at the French Court for some time has been incessantly begging the King to put an end to the projects of his brother the Duke of Alençon in the Low Countries. At the same time he has seriously threatened war between Spain and France if this should not be done. The King of France is said to have made answer a few days since, that he could not change his brother’s plans, that his nobles were standing in with Alençon, and that if the King of Spain wanted to make war with France over this he could not help it.
    In London letters of the 5th inst. news dated July 11 and 12 comes from the Azores that a Spanish captain has landed on Santa Maria, one of the islands which adheres to the King of Spain. The other islands support Don Antonio.
    It is reported from England that Don Antonio is raising troops, and that some of his warships have already sailed for the Azores.

    Santa Maria is an island in the Azores group.

117. Walsingham in Paris
                            Paris, August 15, 1581.
    An English Envoy Extraordinary named Walsingham has arrived here. He has requested free passage from the King and has gone on at once to the Duke of Alençon.

118. Don Antonio an instrument of the Queen
                            Paris, August 19, 1581.
    The French ambassador writes from England that this Queen has quite certainly laid hold upon Don Antonio and his ships too. The English here at Court do not indeed deny this but will not be frank about it.

119. The French in the Azores
                            Cologne, August 24, 1581.
    They write from Antwerp that the Azores people, with the help of some French ships, have taken a galleon and five ships from the King of Spain. The fleet of thirty-nine ships fitting out in England is to start at the earliest possible moment. The fleets from New Spain and from Calicut in India will be in the utmost danger. May the Almighty escort both safe home. In letters of the 16th inst. we hear from Antwerp that sailings from England to Spain and Portugal are forbidden. What will happen in Spain over this we shall hear some day.

120. Defeat of the Spaniards confirmed
                            Antwerp, September 2, 1581.
    London letters of the 26th of last month confirm the defeat of the Spaniards in the Azores. It is also stated that Don Antonio is fitting out some ships which have not yet started owing to contrary winds. But others declare that the captains could not agree with one another because some wanted the Englishman Drake to command, while others fear his strictness and want somebody else for Admiral. However, it is also maintained that this fleet is still awaiting reinforcements from France.
121. Don Antonio detained by the Queen
                            Frankfort, September 17, 1581.
    It is reported from England that Don Antonio’s fleet is not starting because there is no money in hand. The Queen of England is said to be selling the provisions which she had caused to be delivered on board. They say there is much jealousy between England and France and neither trusts the other. The treaty provides that France shall equip thirty ships, but we hear that not a single one has yet been fitted out. So the Queen of England sees that France does not keep faith and thus she loses confidence. It is also said here that His Majesty of Spain has captured the Azores. If this should be true it would be a very good thing for Portuguese sea trade.

122. At last he puts to Sea
                            Cologne, October 15, 1581.
    They announce from Antwerp that Don Antonio has left England for La Rochelle. Some townsmen here who have received English letters of the 23rd September declare that Don Antonio’s fleet has put to sea for a destination unknown. His Majesty of Spain is said to be arming heavily, and to have twenty-eight ships at Cadiz and San Lucar ready to send to the Straits of Megellan. His Majesty is probably going to oppose the English captain Drake with these. Nothing is heard of the fleet from New Spain and it is not known where it can have been for so long.

123. Alençon again in England
                            London, November 18, 1581.
    The Duke of Alençon is still here, and appeared yesterday standing at the window by the Queen’s side. He has been attending a tourney held in honour of this Queen because twenty-three years ago yesterday she ascended the throne and has reigned happily hitherto. About the negotiations of Alençon there is nothing definite to report. His Secretary is expected here from France.
    Alençon is said to have despatched some of his officers from here to lead his troops from Artois into the Low Countries.

    See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 46, Alençon.

124. What does Elizabeth mean to do?
                            Antwerp, December 5, 1581.
    It is recently reported what tourneys and diversions have been provided in London in honour of the Duke of Alençon. News of his marriage has also reached here, in joy whereover the big bell was rung and the big gun fired. On November 29 bonfires were lighted too. But all this might as well have been omitted, and I am almost ashamed to mention this childishness, all the more as the last London letters are very cool about the marriage. It appears that negotiations are still hitching at certain points. They write that on the 5th, that is to-day, Parliament is to meet in London. Many hope for the match, for then the Duke of Alençon will become absolute master of the Low Countries. The Count of Emden, who has been in England and is to be Governor of Friesland, is said to be raising troops at Deventer in the name of the Queen of England.

    Edzardus II, Count of Emden, 1532-1599.

125. The French Marriage unpopular in England, but Alençon is living in the  
    Queen’s Palace, though all is uncertain. Hanging of Jesuits in England
                Verbal report of a traveller from England (undated).
    On December 10, I left England by London and on the 15th inst., thank God, I arrived safely at Antwerp. Here I am told that the marriage between the Queen and the Duke of Alençon has been announced as certain. In London and all over the country nothing is known of this. It is talked of in secret, but nobody dare speak openly about it. I heard various people mention it in London, and understood that on the 22nd of last month the Queen gave the Duke of Alençon a diamond as betrothal gift. But even this was only conditional apparently, as his brother, the King of France, has first to sign and carry through certain provisions. So a Secretary has been sent to France and his return is now awaited. He may have arrived already, as last Sunday about forty English miles from London I met some French noblemen travelling with thirty-six posthorses. I did ask whether this Secretary was among them but could not find out. It is said that, on the return of this Secretary with the above porvisions assented to, the Queen will announce the marriage to her Council, for by the law of the land she may not marry without their consent. Some think that after this announcement there will be a rising, since the English do not like the French and are grumbling loudly over this marriage. They cannot show this in public, as the Queen keeps very good order.
    On the fourth day after my arrival four Jesuits were hanged and their heads stuck up over the City gates. Some of their companions are still in prison and will fare no better. They are said to have brought a Bull from the Pope to stir the people up. On the afternoon of December 7, I saw the Queen out hunting. Alençon was following immediately after. I stood so close by her that I heard her speak. She does not look so old as she is said to be. The Duke is alleged to be in high favour, some say that he is even allowed into her bedroom. If this marriage should fall through, the Duke will have to be contented elsewhere, or else he will be a general laughing stock. The Queen asked Monsieur de Sainte Aldegonde last week what he had written to the Low Countries about her marriage. He replied that he had signified to His Excellency the Prince of Orange that he hope it would take place. On this she seems to have smitten him laughingly on the mouth with her glove and to have said: “O, que vous êtes bon galant!”  I saw the Duke yesterday and to-day at dinner. On Fridays he is served with fish and on Sundays with flesh. He lives in the Queen’s palace and Mass is said daily in his chamber. Two of the servants of the Spanish ambassador wanted to see how he behaved at it, but they were chased out of the room by the pages and the door was shut.
    About Don Antonio and whether ships are being fitted out for him I have not managed to learn anything. It was being rumoured in London that he was dead, but there were no more recent letters than those brought by me and by the courier who rode out from Rouen with me. So for the present I disbelieve in his death.

    Edmund Campion, 1540-1581, an English Jesuit who was Fellow of St. John’s at Oxford and took his M.A. degree there. On Elizabeth’s visit to the University she was welcomed with a Latin address by Campion. Leicester and Cecil granted him their favour. He wished to become a Professor at the Catholic University which it was intended to refound at Dublin. He ultimately fled from England and went to the English College at Douai. From there he made a pilgrimage to Rome on foot and entered the Order of Jesuits. He was ordained priest at Prague in 1578, and at the desire of Allen went to England with Parsons and the lay brother Emerson. In London he preached to congregations in secret. He and two other priests were arrested for treason and thrown into the Tower. His freedom was offered him on certain conditions which he rejected. After repeated rackings he was allowed to hold public disputations, and Philip, Earl of Arundel, was among his converts. He and his companions Clerwin and Briand were executed at Tyburn on December 1, 1581.

    Robert Parsons or Persons, 1546-1610, an English Jesuit, was Fellow of Balliol at Oxford. For some time he was in favour with Lord Buckhurst. He left England in 1574 to study medicine at Padua, entered the Jesuit Order in 1575, and was ordained priest in 1578. In company with Campion he went to England, where he preached with special zeal to the country gentry. For a while he escaped pursuit by residing with Mendoza. He set up a secret press and published a set of tracts which even reached the Court. In a hiding-place in a wood he printed the famous polemic known as Campion’s Decem Rationes. In 1581 he fled to Normandy. Later on he strove to obtain the liberation of Mary Stuart, and became a zealous supporter of the Guises. He worked very hard to promote a Spanish invasion of Scotland and was despatched to Philip II at Lisbon to submit to him the plans of the Guises. With the same object Creighton was in the meanwhile sent to the Pope at Rome. As these projects came to nothing, he went to Rome in 1585 and remained there till 1588, busying himself chiefly about the promotion of Allen to the Cardinalate. From 1588 to 1597 he lived mostly in Spain, where he founded an English seminary for priests. Together with Sir Francis Englefield, he was untiring in his efforts to egg on Spain against England, publishing outrageous abuse of his country and paying special attention to the Queen and the succession to the throne. Even in James I’s reign he continued his activities. He died Prefect of the English Jesuit mission and was buried by Allen’s side in the church of the English College in Rome.

    Philippe de Marnix, Monsieur de Sainte-Aldegonde, a Netherlands statesman, officer and man of letters, 1538-1598.

    See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 43, Execution of Jesuits.

126. The French Marriage unpopular in England, but Alençon is living in the
    Queen’s Palace, though all is uncertain. Hanging of Jesuits in England.
                            Antwerp, December 16, 1581.
    The latest London letters dated the 9th and received here to-day give such different views about the marriage that nobody knows what to believe. The Queen is said to behave to Alençon just as if he were her husband and this does not please the English at all. The London letters report that the Secretary from France has obtained the King’s ratification of all provisions, so that the marriage cannot fall through again. Moreover there are no signs of Alençon intending to leave London. It is also stated from London that Calais and Boulogne are to be returned to the English crown. This is said not to be the least important item in the negotiations. Some English Jesuits, come to London from Rome to win over the people on behalf of the Pope, have been arrested. Three have been hanged and two quartered. They are supposed to have practised all sorts of treacheries and to have slandered the Queen disgracefully. Sixteen more have apparently been executed.
    Letters from Seville announce that of the 35 ships, which the King of Spain sent out with 2000 men to build a fortress, only 10 have arrived safe. The remainder have been lost.

127. Alençon is probably leaving England   
                            London, December 16, 1581.
    There is a rumour that the Duke of Alençon is to leave here on the 18th or 19th, but it is not yet confirmed. The three Queen’s ships which are to convey him to Dunkirk are ready and the Lord High Admiral is to be on board. Others say the ships are ready to bring the Queen Dowager of France over here. Monsieur de Sainte Aldegonde is awaiting letters from the Prince of Orange and will then leave, whether with or without the Duke is unknown. The Duke is said already to have sent a nobleman on in advance to prepare for his reception at Dunkirk. As for the marriage it is the same old story, a lot of talk but no end in view.

128. He will go to Antwerp
                            London, December 23, 1581.
    The departure of the Duke of Alençon has been postponed hitherto owing to contrary winds. The Queen is to give him a naval escort as soon as the weather improves. But this will not be done till after Christmas. Alençon is said to be determined to pass by Dover and Zeeland and so to Antwerp, but he means to return in a month. This together with the marriage plan utterly bewilders many intelligent people, particularly as the Parliamentary session is prolonged to January 18. Fifty thousand crowns cash and 30,000 crowns in bills on France have been sent here for the Duke. The French up to now have shown themselves very munificent.

129. And will meet the Prince of Orange
                            Cologne, January 5, 1582.
    In Antwerp letters of December 30th we hear that nothing is likely to come of the marriage between England and Alençon, but England is to lend Alençon a sum of money yearly till he ascends the French throne himself. The Prince of Orange should have gone from Antwerp to Zeeland on December 31st, in order to await there the arrival of Alençon from England, and to receive him. But many suppose that the Prince of Orange will not come to Antwerp after all unless he is asked to and promised a sum of money. What Alençon is going to do will appear in a few days.

130. But perhaps he is going to France after all
                            Cologne, January 25, 1582.
    In letters from Antwerp of the 20th inst. we are informed that letters from London of the 13th inst. have arrived there not yet giving the date of the Duke of Alençon’s departure. It looks as though he was going straight from England to France and from there on into the Low Countries. If Alençon does not come to Antwerp, Orange will not come either. We also hear that the Prince of Orange has sent Monsieur Aldegonde as well as an Antwerp mayor to the Duke of Alençon in London. When they return we shall know whether the agreement between Zeeland and Orange is to stand. The towns demanded by the Duke of Alençon, Antwerp, Ghent and Flushing, will not admit his garrisons. If they will not have the garrisons Alençon will not go to Flanders either. It is said here that the Queen Dowager of France has gone to Calais. If this is correct it has been done in order to make negotiation at first hand possible. But however things ultimately turn out it seems that the league with England is not yet formed and what will come of it we shall see. Don Antonio of Portugal is said to be buying in Antwerp six hundred muskets and a quantity of other military stores such as spears and halberds. Don Antonio appears to have gone to La Rochelle with Captain Strozzi, and a fleet is to be equipped for him there. This evening there is a tale on Change that the Duke of Alençon is to make peace between the King of Spain and the Low Countries, and this is why the warships in England which were to have escorted him over here are being dismantled. On the English coast two ships bound for Spain have been lost by the carelessness of the crews. They are said to have been worth fifty thousand pounds Flemish. That is a serious loss for Spanish traders in Antwerp.

131. Alençon reaches Flushing
                            Cologne, February 15, 1582.
    Antwerp letters of the 11th inst. announce that the Duke of Alençon arrived in Flushing at 11 A.M. on the 10th. With him came a number of English nobles and the Earls. The Queen of England escorted him on land as far as Dover in person. The horses and baggage of the Earls have reached Antwerp. Also sixty Swiss for a bodyguard are said to have come to Zeeland. He is expected in Antwerp with the Prince of Orange and many stands and triumphal arches have been erected in his honour. The English Nation in Antwerp is alleged to have dressed thirty-six persons in flesh-coloured velvet to meet d’Alençon and the Earls. The other Nations too are preparing to receive him. It is said, moreover, in letters from London of the 3rd inst. that the Queen did not like to let him go, but that the Low Countries government was so pressing that he did not like to keep it waiting any longer. It is believed, however, that he will soon return to England. From this we might infer that England has concluded a formal alliance with him and Orange.

    “The Queen herself, to doe him Honour, accompanied him as far as Canterbury, and commanded the Earl of Leicester, Charles Howard, Hunsdon, Willoughby, Windsor, and Sheffield, Barons, Sir Philip Sidney, Sir Francis Russell, Sir George Bourchi3er, and some other eminent knights, to wait upon him as far as Antwerp.”—CAMDEN.

132. He is received at Antwerp with great magnificence
                            Antwerp, February 24, 1582.
    With an imposing number of smart warships, three of the most distinguished Englishmen and many other persons of high birth the Duke of Alençon arrived here at nine o’clock on the morning of the 19th. The noise of the salute was indescribable. He disembarked outside the town where a handsome staging had been erected. A number of citizens on foot, the officials and the entire English Nation had come out to meet him there. The English were dressed in velvet and mounted. Soon after the Government of the United Provinces led His Highness on to the platform and read out to him an address stating why they had chosen him as their ruler in place of the King of Spain. He took a triple oath to observe the sixty-three Articles read out to him. Then, in accordance with ancient custom, he was invested with the ducal robe, to wit a red velvet cloak trimmed with ermine, and a red woollen cap likewise trimmed with ermine was placed upon his head. Beneath a golden canopy borne by four councillors he was solemnly led through the city. There followed him:  the Prince of Orange, the chief nobles of our country and a few French. On the 22nd inst. the Duke renewed the oath on a magnificent platform in front of the Town Hall. The arms of the King of Spain are everywhere covered over by the arms of the Duke of Alençon. In the Town Hall a gorgeous banquet was held. While all this was being accomplished the English Lords with their retinue remained here. Yesterday they put to sea with a favourable wind, leaving the Duke behind. They have commended the Duke to the government most heartily, and submitted despatches from the Queen of England in which she pledges herself to bring help and security to this land. His Highness has not many troops with him, and it is not known how he will manage to defend the country. No doubt France, England and the Low Countries have formed a powerful league, but the King of Spain will do his best too.

133. English Troops for the Low Countries
                            Cologne, March 8, 1582.
    They write from England that this Queen is sure to send the Duke of Alençon English and Scotch auxiliaries both horse and foot. She will place in the field forty troops of horse and twenty thousand foot. Seven ships from Lisbon with foodstuffs have put into Zeeland, from which it is evident that trade with Spain still goes on.

134. English Money too 
                            Cologne, April 26, 1582.
    They say that on four ships there have come into Antwerp from England twelve chests containing £100,000. This will put heart into the Antwerpers but will not last long. However, from this despatch of money it can be gathered that England, France and the Low Countries have concluded a definite alliance.

135. The Turks take Laraish
                            Antwerp, May 19, 1582.
    Letters from London of May 12 report that with the consent of the King of Barbary the Turks have taken Laraish, so that the Straits of Gibraltar have become exceedingly unsafe. They also say in London that Frenchmen have landed on the coast of Portugal and done much damage. The English ships have sailed for the Moluccas.

136. Where has Don Antonio gone?
                            Cologne, July 12, 1582.
    Antwerp letters of the 7th inst. assert that Don Antonio of Portugal sailed from France on June 17 with eighty sail and seven to eight thousand men. Whither he has betaken himself we shall soon learn. Letters from Lisbon of the 14th June have arrived in Antwerp. All they report is that the King has a big fleet ready. It is to escort the ships from India. Portuguese seaboard towns are being garrisoned to prevent invasion by Don Antonio.

137. Not to Bayona surely?
                            Cologne, July 26, 1582.
    They write from Antwerp that Don Antonio’s fleet has appeared off Galicia and besieged the town of Bayonne, whereupon His Spanish Majesty recalled to Spain the troops which should have come to the Low Countries. Nobody believes this tale, for already a number of Spaniards and Italians have turned up here and the rest will soon follow. They are to go to Louvain in Brabant where the Prince of Parma is also due.

138. The English and Scotch Troops fall out with the French
                            Cologne, August 2, 1582.
    There has been a strong rumour here this week that a regiment of English and Scotch has fallen out with the French. They are said to have fought each other, and a hundred or more English and Scotch are supposed to be dead. The remainder, seven platoons, are believed to have surrendered to the Prince of Parma. And from Tournai come letters of July 27th to the effect that these seven platoons have allowed themselves to be used against the enemy. It is conjectured that the Prince of Parma has an understanding with the Government troops and will bring over more of them to his side.

139. Don Antonio defeated at Sea
                            Lisbon, August 16, 1582.
    You will have heard what a victory His Majesty’s fleet has gained over that of Don Antonio. Two or three of his ships, however, attacked the flagship of the Spanish fleet so heavily that they nearly beat it. The brother of the Postmaster-General was on board. Don Pedro de Toledo stood by them with a big Biscayan ship till they had won. Over twenty-two ships were lost, eighteen captured and the rest badly damaged or destroyed.

140. But this is doubtful
                            London, September 1, 1582.
    About Don Antonio we hear from France that Monsieur de Brisac has come in with four ships. From this some infer that Don Antonio’s fleet has fared ill. We learn that Brisac and Strozzi sailed straight at the Spanish ships and got so near them that Don Antonio’s other ships, owing to a contrary wind, were unable to help. They fought their way through with some loss of life. But then the two fleets met again and Don Antonio seems to have won. He scattered the Spanish fleet and captured fifteen large ships. But Don Antonio’s side also suffered considerable damage, for the Admiral and Philippo Strozzi and many nobles are said to be dead. The island of St. Michael has surrendered to Don Antonio.
    Another account is that a letter from Strozzi to the Queen Dowager of France has come reporting that he is wounded in the head and arm. This news has greatly depressed the Spaniards here, for they fear that it may be only too true about the victory of Don Antonio. Tidings reach here that the Earl of Mar and others in Scotland have risen against the King. They are supposed to have captured the Duke of Lennox in order to kill him, like the old Governor last year. They wished to restore the Catholic religion. But this project has been thwarted despite his youth by the King of Scotland with the help of his retainers. He has imprisoned some of the Catholic rebels. What will happen next, time will reveal.

    In the sea-fight off the Azores in July 1582 the French fleet, under Philippo Strozzi, was beaten by the Spaniards, so that Don Antonio’s chances of the Portuguese throne were diminished. The news from Scotland is about the plot to remove King James VI and thus facilitate the restoration of Catholicism.

    Esmé Stuart, sixth Seigneur d’Aubigny, first Duke of Lennox, 1542-1583. He was sent to Scotland at the suggestion of the Guises, with the idea of succeeding to the throne if the King should die childless. In 1581 he was made Earl of Lennox by the King of Scots, and after Morton’s execution his power in Scotland reached its zenith. However, he was expelled the country for alleged Catholicism, went in 1583 to Paris, tried to return to Scotland, but died before he got there.

    Arthur Cossé, Duke of Brissac, Grand Panetier and marshal of France. He served under the Duke of Anjou against the Huguenots, was imprisoned in the Bastille for alleged conspiracy and died 1582. He was a great drinker, and therefore nicknamed “Maréchal des Bouteilles.”

141. Some say he was successful
                            London, September 8, 1582.
    About Don Antonio we hear that two of his ships have arrived at Plymouth from Lisbon. They made the passage in twenty days, and report that immediately after sailing they met five or six warships of the King of Spain, mauled them badly and captured their Captains. It is announced that Don Antonio has taken thirteen Spanish ships and sunk some others. He is said also to have got hold of eleven ships of the Indian fleet. Don Antonio’s men here corroborate this. Don Antonio himself seems to have proceeded to San Miguel. However, they write from France that no credence is placed in thee rumours as no ship has yet come in with a detailed report.

142. Tribulations of Spanish Ships in Distant Seas
                            Lisbon, September 10, 1582.
    Nine days ago an Indian ship which sailed last March to India with our own ships returned here. She lost her way off the coast of Brazil and met such rough weather that for a long time she could not cross the Line. Finally she had to come home. Four days since we got news from San Miguel that two ships from Portuguese India have come in there. They are bringing Don Christoval de Erasso here in company with six warships. Of the four ships expected from India this year there is no news. Some maintain that this is because the ships have not arrived in India from Malacca and cargoes are short, so they will not sail at present. But nothing is yet known, and the uncertainty makes business slack. In foodstuffs there is nothing doing.


143. Warring Religions in Scotland
                            Paris, November 10, 1582.
    It is fairly well known what changes Monsieur d’Aubigny, otherwise Earl Lennox, wanted to make at the Court of the King of Scots. The King removed him from Court thinking thereby to appease his adversaries. but they are not content with this, keep the King under restraint and want him to allow them to force this d’Aubigny into exile, and to confiscate his property. The King is said now to be at Littlebury, d’Aubigny at Dumbarton, a strong fortress on the coast, where with a few men he can hold out for a year against all Scotland. The good understanding long existing between the King and the captive Queen his Mother has caused the King to withdraw his favour from the Huguenots. Monsieur de la Mothe Fénelon, long since Ambassador-in-ordinary to England, has been sent away from here. The Queen of England has despatched two Commissioners to Scotland and offered that King a safe-conduct to come to her. So this fire will probably spread in England too.

144. Elizabeth seems to break with Alençon
                            Antwerp, February 2, 1583 (O.S.)
    The Queen of England has sent two messengers here this week. We are informed by confidential letters from England that she has dismissed the ambassadors of the Duke of Alençon, the King of France and the King of Spain, who were in England. Also she has kept back a large sum of money which she was about to transmit to Alençon. The Catholics in Scotland tried to send the young King away to France, but they failed and their ringleaders have been imprisoned.

145. Elizabeth seems to break with Alençon
                            Cologne, February 14, 1583.
    The Queen of England has sent an emissary to Antwerp to discover the exact truth about the quarrel between Alençon and the city of Antwerp.

146. Rumours of Peace with Spain
                        Cologne, April 11, 1583.
    Fresh letters from Antwerp of the 12th inst. (N.S.) state that the marriage of the Prince of Orange has taken place. The Envoy of the Queen of England, who was with the Duke of Alençon, conveyed despatches from Antwerp to the Prince of Orange. They write from Tournay that the Queen of England has laid before the Prince of Parma the draft of a treaty of peace which she hopes to conclude. She requires the Prince of Parma to send this draft at once to Spain, and hopes the King of Spain will accept it. Upon this the Prince of Parma is said to have sent Councillor Richardot to Spain at once, for there is reason to think that the King of Spain will gladly accept the proposal.

147. Don Antonio in Paris
                            Paris, May 1, 1583.
    During the last few days Don Antonio has been here with his two sons. They have been lavishly entertained. Eight ships from Dieppe have sailed in support of him and five more are fitting. Some more ships are to join him from England. King Philip’s fleet has been got ready at Lisbon. It was going to sail to the Azores this month, but it is thought that there will be delay, or that it might be used elsewhere, as it has been discovered that the Turk has sent out sixty sail to be met by the King of Algiers with twenty galleys. This force is to operate against the King of Spain, but where it will attack is uncertain.

148. Attempts to bring in Turkey against Spain
                            Madrid, Spain, May 5, 1583.
    The Queen Dowager of France has sent a ship from Marseilles to Constantinople, to try and persuade the Grand Turk to send a fleet out this year to stir up trouble in the Levant. Certain galleys have already turned up, but it is hoped they will not do much harm. Six more large galleys are being got ready at Marseilles, on pretence of being sent to the Grand Master of Malta. Some think the French would like to make an attempt to catch Spinola’s Genoese galleys, which often sail to and fro with money.

    Amurath III was then Sultan of Turkey, and Jacques de Germigny was French Ambassador at Constantinople. The English agent at Constantinople was William Harebone, the first representative that England ever had in Turkey. He was succeeded in 1588 by Edward Burton.

    Ferdinand Spinola, son of Philip Spinola, Spanish Admiral, fell in an engagement at sea off Ostend, 1603.

149. Elizabeth ready to help the States General
                            Antwerp, July 30, 1583.
    It is confirmed that the Queen of England has granted the States General twelve thousand English and Scotch auxiliaries. She is ready to pay them with her own money, but desires to have some towns, among them Sluys, pledged to her, until she has received her money back. Some think however that these troops are more likely to be for the use of John Casimir than of the States General, for it is known that he has had some important representatives at the English Court.

150. Elizabeth ready to help the States General
                            Cologne, August 1, 1583.
    The English Captain Norris, who has long been in the service of the States General, came from England to the Prince of Orange in Zeeland on the 4th inst. He reports that fifteen thousand English soldiers are ready now. These the Queen is to send to the States General. It is known what security she requires for payment. On hearing her demands the Prince of Orange seems to have summoned the States General to see what security could be given to the English. We hear also that Duke John Casimir wrote to the States General that, if they would pay off a portion of their old debt to His Highness, and would give security for the fresh payment, he would bring with him efficient troops, both horse and foot. But as it is notorious that the States cannot pay the men already recruited, still less will they have the means to pay His Highness and to furnish security to the English. It would appear that to put off the unhappy government in this way simply means prolongation of the war and greater ruin for the country.

151. Whom will James of Scotland marry?
                            Antwerp, September 24, 1583.
    This week there have been all sorts of rumours here, amongst others that the King of Scots has been to France and is planning marriage with the King of Spain’s daughter. It was also announced that the Queen of Scots, who is a prisoner in England, has escaped and arrived at Calais. But letters of yesterday from London and elsewhere in England say nothing. As for the marriage of the King of Scots, it is said that he is to wed a young lady who, after the Queen’s death, will be next heiress to the throne.

    Arabella Stuart, 1575-1615, daughter of Charles Stuart, Earl of Lennox, younger brother of Lord Darnley, a distant relative of Henry VII. As a matter of fact, her claim to the throne was equal with that of James of Scotland; for a time it was even considered superior. She was subject to constant persecution by James and Elizabeth, and strove to escape by fleeing to France. But she was arrested, put into the Tower, and kept there till she died.

152. Strained Relations with Scotland
                            Antwerp, October 15, 1583.
    As we have already reported to you, the Queen of England despatched her envoy, Mr. Walsingham, to the King of Scots. Now when he returned to England, as London letters announce, without having obtained an audience, the Queen called up her entire army and all the people, and occupied all coasts, frontiers and ports. These London letters add that the King of Scots tried to get over to France, but this was discovered and prevented by some of his Councillors. He has put certain of them in prison. He says he is also Prince of England, and is going to set his Mother free from prison. So the sun does not shine between England and Scotland, and may God the Lord dispose all for the best.

153. Scotch and English Soldiers combine in Flanders
                            Antwerp, December 3, 1583.
    Hitherto Scotch, English, Walloons and Flemings have been stationed as garrison in the town of Alost. As they could not be well provided with money and also suffered great lack of food, quarrels often arose between them. Yesterday came news that these Scotch and English had drawn up on one side of the town in order of battle, had beaten their drums and proclaimed that all those who were not prepared to place themselves in the service and under the orders of the Prince of Parma should leave the town. Thereupon the Governor of the town at once returned with his remaining troops, and is now lying not far from here. Rumour goes that the English and Scotch have come to terms with the Prince of Parma and promised to surrender the town. Till yesterday it was maintained, on the other hand, that the Scotch and English had only given a false alarm, in order thereby the more quickly and easily to get rid of the other soldiers, so as to be better provided with pay and food in future. However this may be, till close of Change this evening, we have been unable to find out how things are.



154. Wrecks of Spanish Ships
                            (No heading, no date.)
    During the last few days we have had very bad news from England. Of the twelve ships which left here for Lisbon three weeks ago the best and finest was lost on the voyage down the English coast, with two hundred loads of corn, all belonging to citizens here. Only the crew managed to escape and come here. They say that the ship hung in the wind on a fine clear day, and that they beheld with their very eyes the evil spirit in bodily form, from which they conclude that the ship has been wrecked and destroyed by magic alone.
    Another Hamburg ship was lost at Greenwich in England by the carelessness of the crew. It carried much wax, six bales of silk, some chests of silken garments and Milanese fustian, and a quantity of wool and linen. Most was saved but still much damage was done. We hear from England too that a plot was recently discovered in London. The object was to kill the Queen, and, what is more, the brother of the lately executed Duke of Norfolk was to do it with his own hand. But he failed and was detected, and besides him another Earl and a nobleman have been arrested. As Dukes are no longer wanted in England now, they are apt to use the title Lord. The prisoners are of high birth and will have to suffer a shameful death.

155. Plots against the Queen
Cologne, December 29, 1583.
    A week ago it was announced that a nobleman who was going to shoot that Queen had been arrested. This is not true, only a malicious rumour.

156. Plots against the Queen
                            Antwerp, January 7, 1584.
    Letters from England this week confirm the news of the plot against the Queen. Many nobles are said to have been arrested, but two of the ringleaders seem to have escaped. There is talk here of the King of Spain fitting out a great fleet against the Netherlands, because he hoped the plot against the Queen’s life would succeed. If it had done so, he would have been able to sail to the Netherlands without fear of England.

    The most important participants in this conspiracy were:
    Edward Arden, 1542-1583, High Sheriff of Warwickshire, apparently an innocent victim of the cruelty with which the conspiracies against the Queen were suppressed. He and his son-in-law, John Somerville, were hanged at Tyburn in October 1583, and their heads stuck on spikes over London Bridge.

    Thomas Lord Paget, d. 1590. He was implicated in the Francis Throgmorton plot of 1583, but escaped to Paris, where the English ambassador vainly demanded his extradition. He lived for a while in Rome, then in Spain, where he drew a pension from Philip II. He died at Brussels.

    Philip Howard, first Earl of Arundel, 1557-1595. His wife openly became a Catholic and he followed her example. Elizabeth had him arrested in 1583 and confined in his own house. Attempts to prove his complicity in the conspiracy failed. He became a Catholic in 1584 and tried to escape from England in 1585, but was caught, thrown into the Tower, and heavily fined. He remained in the Tower till 1588, and on the approach of the Armada held services of intercession with his fellow-prisoners for the victory of Spain. In 1589 he was condemned to death, but the sentence was not carried out, and he remained in the Tower till his death.

    Francis Throgmorton, 1554-1584. Like his father he was a zealous Catholic, and in Paris and Madrid came into close sympathy with the English Catholics residing there. In 1583 he returned to London and was a frequent visitor at the house of Mendoza. He was accused of working for the liberation of Mary Stuart and racked in the Tower, and elaborate plans were found at his house for the invasion of England by the Guises and Spaniards. He was executed at Tyburn on July 10, 1584, but not until he had made frequent confessions of guilt.

157. Plots against the Queen
                            Antwerp, January 21, 1584.
    Letters from London in England report that that Queen has had sentence passed upon the persons who tried to assassinate her. One of the oldest women of the bedchamber has been burnt alive, a gentleman of the Court was first hanged and then quartered, another nobleman who killed himself in prison was burnt. Two other gentlemen of high birth are being closely watched in their houses as they have fallen under suspicion. The conspiracy against the Queen is said to have originated in Rome and Spain.

158. Vengeance
                            Antwerp, February 4, 1584.
    We have received no letters from England this week, but learn through a courtier of the Queen of England that the country is entirely shut off, and that no one can get away from it without a pass and without great danger. This English courtier has gone to the Prince of Orange and confirms the news of the great conspiracy against the Queen of England. At the castle of Greenwich, six miles from London, the Queen’s chamber was to have been blown up with powder. By a lucky accident the secret was revealed, and the Queen had some important people arrested. The French and Spanish ambassadors, likewise all Frenchmen and Spaniards, are to be removed from the country, and the Spanish ambassador is said to have left already.

159. Mendoza, ejected from England, may go to Paris
                            Paris, March 4, 1584.
    Don Bernardino de Mendoza, the Spanish ambassador, who has resided in England for many years, and was ejected thence by the Queen, is now here, and many say he will be made ambassador at this Court.

160. Jesuits executed
                            Cologne, March 8, 1584.
    Letters have reached Antwerp from England to say that that Queen has executed five Jesuits accused of having a part in the conspiracy against her. There is also an unfounded rumour of the discovery of a plot against the King of Scots. A shot is said to have been fired at him but to have missed. If there should be anything in this we are sure to hear soon.

161. More Warlike Preparations
                            Antwerp, April 7, 1584.
    The inhabitants of Zeeland, Holland and Antwerp are fitting out several powerful warships. It is thought they will sail from here to Spain and Portugal. The Queen of England is also said to be about to equip powerful ships against Spain.

162. Turkey again
                            Vienna, May 12, 1584.
    Letters have come from Constantinople announcing that the French representative there has received letters which nearly caused him to faint. This is because he is dismissed his place and his service in disgrace. Another French gentleman is to go to Constantinople in place of him, with orders to carry on his negotiations with some person selected by the Sultan, because the King of France suspects Sinan Pasha, as he has hitherto shown himself in favour of Spain. The King of France wants Turkey to equip a fleet, to combine with France against the King of Spain.

163. A Christening
                            Antwerp, May 13, 1584.
    The christening is to take place at the Prince of Orange’s on the 24th inst. The King of Denmark, the King of Navarre and the Queen of England are to be sponsors.

    This refers to the christening of Frederick Henry, son of William of Orange by his fourth wife Louise, daughter of Admiral de Coligny.

164. Trouble with Scotland
                            Antwerp, May 19, 1584.
    Yesterday we received letters from London announcing that the City of London is putting three thousand men into the field, presumably against Scotland. In Scotland a conspiracy against England in favour of the King of Spain has been discovered. We shall probably hear more details about it next week.

165. Precedence at the Funeral of Alençon
                            Paris, last day of June 1584.
    To the funeral of the Duke of Alençon on the 21st inst. all ambassadors except the Spaniard came to St. Maur in company, to show their sympathy with the King and Queen. But as Scotland and England dispute precedence, and Scotland from time immemorial has had the preference at this Court, and the Papal Nuncio refuses to be in the same company as the English ambassador, and the other ambassadors from religious reasons also shrink from him, he was excluded. But he was granted the privilege of being received in audience alone half an hour before the rest. Then the others followed together thus: first the Papal Nuncio, after him the two Scotch ambassadors, the Archbishop of Glasgow representing the Queen on the right hand, and the representatives of the King on the left. Then came the ambassadors of Venice, Savoy and Ferrara. On the 24th inst. the King with his suite and many Princes of the blood, all in mourning, rode into the Church of St. Jacques, where the Duke’s body lay in state. The Queen had herself borne there in a litter carried by horses, to bid farewell to the corpse. On the 25th the corpse was fetched and carried to the Church of Notre-Dame, with so great ceremonies as were hardly finished between two o’clock and evening. The procession was led by four Princes riding on ponies immediately behind the corpse. The ambassadors rode also, Ferrara first, then Savoy, Venice, Scotland, and the papal Nuncio last. With the Savoyard and Scotch ambassadors rode Bishops, by the Papal representative likewise Bishops, by the others members of the Order of St. Michael. The English ambassador stayed at home. although he had received orders from his Queen to ride as far as the church, he had found out that if he were to precede the Scotch ambassador this latter would hold him back by force. Also the Scotch Body Guard would have assisted. So he stayed at home, no little vexed that the Scotchman should have braved him thus and shown himself as representing his King to be a Catholic.

166. Antwerp Sea Trade in Difficulties
                            Antwerp, June 30, 1584.
    Warships are being kept at sea to stop supplies to the English, and likewise to those coming from Lisbon, Spain and France. Three ships have been intercepted, two English laden with wheat, one from Spain with molasses. If the embargo is strictly kept, it will cause want and distress in many ways.

167. France, England and the Low Countries
                            Paris, August 15, 1584.
    As the Queen of England greatly fears Spain and Scotland, she wishes to conclude a defensive alliance with the Crown of France, but whether this will come about we do not know.

168. England and the Low Countries
                            Antwerp, August 21, 1584.
    Letters have been received from England, and Mr. van Aldegonde has announced in Council that the City of London is giving a war subsidy of £4000 in cash and bills. The money is to be received here. It appears that England, in conjunction with Holland and Zeeland, intends to hold this town against the King of Spain.

169. England and the Low Countries
                            Antwerp, September 4, 1584.
    Six hundred English soldiers have arrived at Lillo. They were paraded yesterday, and arms were issued to them from here. Another two thousand six hundred are to come without delay.

170. More Losses at Sea
                            Antwerp, December 5, 1584.
    A letter comes from Middelburg to say that just lately two fine ships with large cargoes left Flushing for England, having on board from Antwerp many important passengers and traders, with women and children. The malcontents met the ships at sea and fought them for three hours. The two ships finally had to surrender and were taken to Dunkirk. They say the two ships were worth some thirty thousand pounds Flemish. This is a great loss and injury. May God comfort the sufferers!

171. Negotiations hanging fire
                            Cologne, December 24, 1584.
    Letters from Middelburg of the 12th inst. confirm that Count Maurice, son of the late Prince of Orange, has arrived there. An English envoy was there also, but as no representative came from the United Provinces of Holland the English envoy went away to Holland. It looks as though the unity of the United Provinces were not so complete as it should be.

172. Suspected Treachery in Antwerp
                            Antwerp, January 24, 1585.
    Last week our city was shut off from outside for a whole day, and all were in anxiety. The reason was that three Captains in the pay of the States General demanded passports and leave of absence. From this was inferred a conspiracy to deliver Sainte Aldegonde the mayor here to the enemy. The three Captains are said to have asked the mayor to let them out of the town at night, by opening a gate. The mayor refused this, so without his permission they demanded from the brethren of the Guilds that a gate should be opened, and they should be allowed out. This also was refused. Thereupon these Captains were thrown into prison and are still there. Whether they have already been examined is unknown. But as the malcontents left Flanders for Brabant on the same day it is thought possible that some treachery was planned.

173. France, England and the Low Countries again.
                            Paris, January 26, 1585.
    Our only news is that the ambassadors from the Netherlands have long been at Boulogne, and people naturally wonder whether we shall not soon come to an agreement with them. The rumour goes that the King has sent his Master of Ceremonies to meet them. An Envoy Extraordinary is coming here from England, and we shall make our decision here in accordance with the instructions he brings. It is thought however that the Queen of England, as has long been her habit, will dislike spending money. If the Queen Mother here is of the same opinion, no war need be feared, for our King does not ask for war either in public or in private.

174. France, England and the Low Countries again
                            Paris, February 8, 1585.
    The ambassador of the Low Countries government has been for a fortnight at Senlis fifty miles from here. He is being entertained at the expense of the King. He will not come into Paris before the arrival here of Earl Derby, the English Envoy Extraordinary. By him the Queen of England is sending her Order of the Garter to our King. The English Envoy is stated to have with him numerous nobles and about eighty people all told. He is the guest of the Court, and is to be provided lavishly with food in his quarters as well. The King has sent the Duc de Montpensier and another of our nobles to meet and welcome this English Earl. So far as the Low Countries ambassador is concerned, one may assume that His Majesty is not so zealous for war as his august Mother. Even though no public pronouncement is made at once, something might come of it nevertheless.

    Henry Stanley, fourth Earl of Derby, 1531-1593, privy Councillor in 1585, one of the Judges of Mary Stuart.

175. Antonio Perez in prison again
                            Madrid, February 9, 1585.
    Your worship will no doubt be so good as to recollect how about six years since Secretary Antonio Perez, who stood in high reputation with His Majesty, was thrown into prison. He was accused of being an accomplice in the assassination of Secretary Escobedo. However he was released about a year later, though with orders to keep away from Court. After the lapse of four years, people began to think him innocent, and to suppose that His Majesty would restore him to office. But a few days ago, after His Majesty had left here, the aforesaid Antonio Perez was again arrested by one of the magistrates of the Court, and conveyed to a fortress about fifteen miles from Segovia. All his property has been confiscated. There is much talk about this imprisonment, and his responsibility for the murder of Escobedo is thought to be demonstrable. Another idea is that the occurrence is due to the bribes and presents he has accepted. However this may be, it is thought to be a bad sign, and there is anxiety lest he, like another Secretary imprisoned in the summer, may have been in secret correspondence with Constantinople. God grant a better outcome, for this Secretary Perez was beloved by few and particularly harsh to foreigners. I wanted to tell your Worship this in default of other news.

176. France at last joins in the Alliance
                            Antwerp, February 21, 1585.
    A few days ago letters came from Cambrai, England and Middelburg, announcing that the negotiations with the King of France to obtain his support for these countries have ended in his deciding to send help. The English write to their representative here to instruct English people, who for the moment are in small numbers, not to leave the place. At Middelburg also where they are to be found with their goods, this nation has been informed that in a few days a change will take place in this country.

177. The Derby Embassy to Paris
                            Paris, February 21, 1585.
    Yesterday Earl Derby reached St. Denis, not three miles from here. He has with him a great retinue of nobles.
    The permanent English ambassador at this Court went out to meet him, and the King caused the Duc de Montpensier to escort him on his way. Great preparations are being made to entertain him with banquets, masques and other amusements. The King is putting him up free in the same way as the Dutch Envoy, and much money will be spent. The English here announce that their Queen expelled all Jesuits a month ago. They were first given a gratuity, and then taken to the frontier to go wherever they wished.
178. The Garter conferred upon the King of France

                            Paris, March 5, 1585.
    The English Envoy, the Earl of Derby, entered this city in the afternoon of the 23rd ult., and the Duc de Montpensier representing the King rode out to meet him. On his entry he was escorted by four hundred horse. On the very next day he had an audience of His Majesty, and on the following Thursday, which was the 28th of February, on behalf of his Queen he conferred the Order of the Garter upon the King in the Church of the Austin Friars. His Majesty wore the usual dress of a Knight of the Order. In addition to the Knights of the Order here, there were present at this ceremony the Papal Nuncio and the Spanish and Venetian ambassadors. The Garter is valued at fifty thousand crowns. In return the King is said to have prepared a magnificent coach with all fittings to still greater value for presentation to the Queen of England. The Envoy was most honourably feasted at banquets, especially by the King. Next week he is to return to England, and we are not told what other subjects he may have negotiated about here on behalf of his Queen.

179. Sentence on Antonio Perez
                            Madrid, March 5, 1585.
    Your Worship was recently informed that Secretary Antonio Perez was rearrested on His Majesty’s command. It is now definitely announced that he has been condemned to two years’ imprisonment, ten years’ banishment, the same period of deprivation of office, and a fine of thirty thousand reals. In time no doubt this sentence will be reduced.

180. English Soldiers in Zeeland badly treated
                            Antwerp, March 11, 1585.
    The Queen of England is said to have ordered the return home of the English soldiers who came over here last summer. She seems to have paid Zeeland £500 to facilitate their passage. The reason alleged for this is that the English here are badly paid, and that they are dying of hunger and neglect in their camp in the municipal wood outside the town here. They had expected to be stationed inside the town as garrison. But this is not the case. They would be ready to stay in the country if they were allowed into the town, but it is hoped this will not occur.

181. Another Plot against the Queen
                            Antwerp, March 30, 1585.
    It turns out that that Queen in England was to have been assassinated yet again, and this time by one of her principal doctors. After having settled to kill the Queen he fell at her feet and begged mercy for his life, but was thrown into prison all the same.

    The conspirator William Parry was first in the service of the Court and volunteered to keep a watch over English Catholics in France on behalf of Burghley. He lived in that country for a while, and, after a short stay in England in 1582, returned there and entered into connection with resident Catholics such as John and Thomas roter, Thomas Copley, and Edmund Neville. He also approached the Jesuits and eagerly read the writings of Cardinal Allen. He made a plan to kill Elizabeth. In 1584 he came back to England and there betrayed a great plot directed against the Queen. He was elected to Parliament, but opposed a Bill to inflict capital punishment on Jesuits, Seminarists, and the like. Upon this he was arrested, but soon set at liberty again. Shortly after, he was rearrested and made a full confession. He was expelled from parliament and executed in Palace Yard, Westminster, March 2, 1585.

182. Execution of an English Traitor at Antwerp
                            Antwerp, April 24, 1585.
    As was lately mentioned amongst other things an English Captain was sentenced to death here. He departed this world on the 14th like a good Christian after confessing his crimes. He was first of all strangled at the stake, then his head was cut off with an axe and put up in the city. His body was buried. Many urgent petitions were made on his behalf, but to no purpose. He went to his death in armour and fully equipped with his sword at his side. He had one hundred and fifty men under him and tried to take them over to the enemy. They hoped to be able to go from here to Bergen-op-Zoom and to sail thence for England. Count von Hohenlohe is now in command of them. He has deprived them of arms and is using them to dig on the dykes.

183. English Help offered to the States General
                            Antwerp, May 1, 1585.
    It is reported from Holland that the Queen of England has sent an envoy to the States General at Delft. He offers help to these countries, ten thousand foot and two thousand horse. The Queen is ready to pay these troops, and they are to arrive one month after the pledging of Flushing, Enkhuisen and Briel in Holland.

184. Antwerp in Danger
                            Middelburg, May 11, 1585.
    We have little fresh news that is good, as hitherto with this stream not much could be done. Because the citizens are so slow over the work, the city of Antwerp is in great danger. The States General are said to have decided to offer these countries to the Queen of England unconditionally. What will come of it is known to God alone. Yesterday letters of the 22nd ult. arrived from London. We learn amongst other things that the King of Spain laid a plot with the Prince of Parma against the Queen of England, but Her Majesty discovered the secret. It is unknown so far what truth there is in it, but it is said that the plan was to burn her warships. A great lord who tried to escape to France is said to be in prison. When all this became known the Queen went to London and raised there four thousand men ostensibly for the protection of Herself and the city. She also seems to be calling up the people all over the country. Altogether strange things are afoot. Letters of the last day of April have come in from Rouen. They report that all Spaniards of whatever class have to leave the town by daylight. Moreover, an order has been issued that no foreigner may leave his house between seven in the evening and seven in the morning. Death is threatened for disobedience.

    The siege of Antwerp by Alexander Farnese. The river is the Scheldt.


185. An English Ship escapes from Spain
                            Cologne, July 11, 1585.
    Middelburg letters of the 3rd inst. have come in and announce that an English ship has reached England with an official of His Spanish Majesty on board. The King has given orders to detain all ships in Biscaya. The Englishman, hearing he was to be detained, seems to have cut his cables and got his ship away safe. Twenty of the Spaniard’s party who were on board were killed, and the English Captain got to England with the official of His Spanish Majesty and his servants. From them he learnt that the King is about to fit out a great fleet against the Netherlands, and that England is to be attacked also. Upon this, as a letter of the 27th June from London relates, that Queen is fitting out a great fleet too, and Drake the corsair appears to have thirty well-found ships in England. With these he will lie in wait for the King of Spain’s fleet returning from India and New Spain. It is supposed that open war will break out between Spain and England. We shall soon get to the bottom of this.

186. Siege of Antwerp. Doubts as to English Help
                            Antwerp, July 22, 1585.
    London letters of the 9th say that the envoys from Holland and Zeeland have arrived there. They have been promised that as soon as possible some four thousand English troops and later on a large additional number shall be sent over. But whether the Queen will pay them herself is unknown. Nobody believes she will. It is also doubted whether she will let so many men leave the country. On the 19th inst. at 11 P.M. the two big powder ships were let loose on the bridge of the Malcontents. We learn here that they blew up with a loud report, and it is declared that they made a large hole in the bridge, and that many of the enemy were slain, but what is true in this I do not yet know. The letters from London quoted above add that some thirty ships from Lisbon are being detained there. They brought a report that a ship had already come in from Calicut, and that the early arrival of the rest was hoped for.

187. English troops at Middelburg. Drake at Sea
                            Cologne, August 9, 1585.
    From Holland on the 2nd inst. comes news that six thousand English soldiers are daily expected in Zeeland, and that the Queen of England has declared war against Spain because English ships and English subjects and property are being detained in Spain, and some property has already been sold. The Queen has done the same in England. It is also announced that the Queen will actively support the Hollanders and Zeelanders, and will call upon Denmark and Sweden to help. From Middelburg under date the last of July, comes the statement that Colonel Norris, the Earl of Leicester and Lord Pelham are to be in command of the English troops sent by the Queen in aid of the Hollanders and Zeelanders, and already arrived at Middelburg. Without the Queen’s consent no ship or letter may leave the country in future. The offices of the Spaniards and Portuguese in London have been closed and their trade records removed. Those who refused to submit their books were imprisoned. It is confirmed that Drake the pirate and his fleet are at sea not only to lie in wait for a fleet from Peru, but that he has actually taken an island from the King of Spain and held up some fishing-boats off Terra Nova.

    Sir William Pelham, d. 1587. He was first Lord Justice of Ireland, where he successfully fought the rebels. He went later on to the Low Countries, and was made a Marshal in the army by Leicester. He quarrelled with the Norris brothers there, was wounded at Zutphen and died at Flushing.

    Terra Nova is Newfoundland.

188. Trade slack in Lisbon
                            Lisbon, August 17, 1585.
    Since my last letter no ship has come in from India, though the Buen Viage is awaited with special anxiety. As no Hamburg ships have put in either, trade is almost entirely quiet. Three days ago twenty-four ships came in from Brazil, and sixteen have gone on to Oporto. They bring much sugar and three thousand quintals of Brazil-wood. It is to be hoped this will revive business here, for, as the Dutch ships are still detained, there is no trade. The night before last there was a heavy wind and two of the largest Dutch ships used it to get away. When this was seen they were pursued, but the wind fell again, so they had to be left. The next morning by order of the Marquis de Santa Cruz, all troops were put on the galleys. During the same night of storm eighteen detained ships sailed away, though they had previously been deprived of their sails. It is not known what the could make fresh sails of, so soon and so secretly. The ships still remaining will have to be punished for the fugitives. But the country too is suffering from the detention of the ships, for the prices of corn and provisions have risen greatly all round, and there is a shortage already. To-morrow four galleys are to sail to the islands and elsewhere along the Spanish coast to intercept the English and French pirates. God grant they may soon bring in the overdue Indian fleet!

189. Trade diminishing at Cologne
                            Cologne, August 29, 1585.
    They write from Zeeland that the Queen of England is putting off the States General with fair words, and that she does not mean to help them, for she would be taking too heavy a burden upon herself.
    Many Netherlanders are leaving here for Antwerp, Malines, Louvain and Brussels. This is already noticeable on Change.

190. English Redcoats at Flushing
                            Cologne, September 6, 1585.
    Letters reach Middelburg from England, announcing that Colonel Norris was first knighted, then made a lord and Field-Marshal. He sailed for Zeeland on the 24th ult. with about eight thousand well-equipped English troops, and more are to follow under command of the Earl of Leicester as General Commanding-in-chief of the whole body. A portion of these men actually arrived at Flushing on the 28th, but Norris and many other officers were driven towards Holland by heavy winds. Among the English are thirty-five Captains, each with a hundred and twenty men in his company. They are all smart men in red c oats, bearing the badge of the Queen of England. Four hundred horse have come over too, and a good number of sappers or trench-diggers. We are told besides that the Queen of England has not decided to take Holland and Zeeland under her protection and away from the King of Spain; all she wants is that the King of Spain should rule his subjects justly and leave them their religion and their privileges. Also all foreign garrison must leave the country, that the Queen may have less anxiety in her own land and be at peace and remain so. We hear also from England that forty English privateers have brought in two ships from Spanish seas laden with Brazilwood and sugar. Captain Drake and his fleet may put out any day with some thirty thousand men aboard.

191. Perhaps the English will take Holland
                            Cologne, September 26, 1585.
    Letters of the 19th inst. from Middelburg report that Lord Davison, ambassador of the Queen of England, arrived there this week. But as Count Maurice, son of the late Prince of Orange, and the Estates of Holland and Zeeland are now meeting at Delft, the ambassador went on to them. A rumour was also current at Middelburg that the Earl of Leicester and many nobles are to come over from England to take possession of Holland.

    William Davison, 1541-1608, Secretary to Queen Elizabeth. He brought about the execution of Mary Stuart against the will of the Queen, and was therefore long imprisoned. He was in disfavour with the Queen till her death.

192. English in Florida
                            Cologne, October 24, 1585.
    Some English ships are said to have left England six or seven months ago, and to have built a fort in Florida in India. Consequently, all English ships and subjects in Spain and Portugal have been detained.

193. English on the Rhine
                            Cologne, October 31, 1585.
    Letters came from London through Amsterdam two days since asseverating that London is surprised to hear that the Queen of England has taken up the cause of Holland and Zeeland. Nothing is known of this in London. It is also said that fresh English troops are passing over daily. That the Queen is sending them is incorrect, but the Consistory of the Calvinists is stated to be recruiting these troops. There is a story circulating too that the States General sent some English soldiers to Nymwegen to capture the redoubt put by the side of the Rhine to stop navigation. The English were twice or thrice beaten back, but at last they charged with such vigour that the Italians who were on the redoubt surrendered.

194. Drake raiding in the Bay of Biscay
                    (Original in Italian.)
                            London, November 9, 1585.
    A ship of the Indian fleet belonging to Richard Greenfield has come in here. She is richly laden with sugar, ginger, hides, gold, silver and cochineal, and is worth a million. Owing to contrary winds Drake’s fleet was still at Bayonne on October 17. It has looted and done much damage to convents and churches and has disembarked 2000 men. The Queen has had a proclamation printed here, giving reasons why she supports the Netherlands and takes them under her protection. She says this protection is the buttress for the alliance which has existed so long between the Netherlands and this realm. She has done it for her own safety, for England could not possibly allow her bitter enemies the Spanish soldiers to rule in the neighbouring country of the Netherlands. Therefore she has caused certain places and districts lying nearest to her realm to be occupied. And the Queen declares that she desires no conquest within the dominion of the Netherlands. But in her Proclamation there is no word to say that she does not desire war with Spain.

195. The Sea unsafe for Trade
                            Antwerp, November 9, 1585.
    As the sea remains so blockaded and shut off, commerce is quite at a standstill, and, although those who trade with Spain and Portugal would like to use Flemish ports, they dare not put out even from there because of the freebooters, of whom there are quantities at sea. They have latterly captured Spanish fishermen and carried them off to England, and other ships of considerable importance they have taken to France and stripped completely. God console the losers!  The Zeelanders now have English garrisons in Flushing, Briel and other places, and it is thought that English are to go to Enkuisen as well. Leicester, Essex and Cumberland, all three of them distinguished Earls, are expected in Holland, besides Lord Grey, who is Colonel in Ireland and has lately suppressed great disorder there. Mr. Sidney is expected too, with many other nobles, all of whom will strive to defend Holland.

    Arthur Grey, fourteenth Lord Grey de Wilton, 1536-1593. Made Lord Deputy of Ireland in 1580, and fought against the rebellion with the utmost energy.

    Sir Philip Sidney, 1554-1586, nephew of Leicester, one of the most noted poets of the English Renaissance, and considered in England to be the ideal of a soldier and man of letters. He fell at the battle of Zutphen.

196. The Queen’s Proclamation about the Low Countries
                            Cologne, November 28, 1585
    It is definitely confirmed that the Queen of England has taken under her protection those districts in the Low Countries which have not returned to their allegiance to the King of Spain, especially Holland and Zeeland. However, she lays down certain conditions which she has already caused to be published in England. The Proclamation in English is already here, but it is to be translated into German. As soon as this is done, I will send you a printed copy. From Amsterdam we learn that letters received there from London say that the English Captain Drake appeared with his ships in a place near Bayonne, belonging to the King of Spain, and that he pillaged the place and the church and set them on fire. The English warships have brought in many ships from Spain and Portugal which were fishing off Terra Nova. They are said also to have brought in some ships from San Domingo, and to have sunk the flagship.

Postscript.
    The most important point in the Queen of England’s Proclamation seems to be the following:
    She has long seen with what harshness the Burgundian territories of her brother the King of Spain have been and are still being ruled. She has frequently pointed this out to the King of Spain by letter, but he has declined to do anything. Indeed he has held her letters as of no account and has cast them aside. She therefore sent a special envoy to Spain, to call her brother’s attention to this. But this envoy was ill received and returned with nothing accomplished. So she has been moved to conclude with the Netherlands an alliance which her predecessors have long had with that country. And she has done this out of compassion for the Netherlands, though she has also been requested by divers potentates to take these countries under her shield and protection. She has no desire to deprive her brother the King of his territory, but all she wishes is to bring it better government, peace and concord, such as she has effected between France and the King of Scotland.
    Seven hundred Spanish and Portuguese have been brought into England in certain ships. They have to go to the mills all day and grind corn.

197. But is she to be trusted?
                            Cologne, November 28, 1585.
    It is further confirmed that the Queen of England means to support Zeeland and Holland. On the other hand, the Earl of Leicester is still absent, though they wrote some time ago to say he might come over any day. Some conjecture that the Queen will treat Holland as she did the Duke of Alençon.

198. Sidney at Flushing
                            Cologne, December 19, 1585.
    Lord Sidney has arrived at Flushing as Governor. The Earl of Leicester has reviewed in London before the Queen and Don Antonio of Portugal the horse and foot which are to come over with him from England. The King of Scotland is said to be so well guarded by the best of the army which adheres to the Queen of England that the insurgent nobles cannot get at him.

199. Leicester in Zeeland
                            Antwerp, December 28, 1585.
    It looks as though in future there would be different news to report and more of it than hitherto. On the 20th inst. my Lord or the Earl of Leicester made a brilliant entry into Zeeland with four thousand men, six hundred horses, and many well-armed and well-found warships and others. He was received with great rejoicing and enthusiasm. It is said everywhere that in the name of Holland Duke Maurice, son of the Prince of Orange, has renounced the Provinces of Holland, and handed them over to Leicester, so that Holland and Zeeland will become quite English. About this there is much pondering among people here. God grant that things may be so disposed that real agreement and sound peace may result. It is said that the Earl of Leicester will hold his Court at Utrecht. With this exception, as almost the whole week was a holiday, we have heard hardly anything from outside, and all wonder what to think about this arrival of the English. The Catholics firmly believe we shall reach a satisfactory peace, but others fear a big war again. Time will show all this in the end. Some days ago it was announced that the King of Spain had sent some emissaries to the Queen of England, and that she had sent some in return, but this is thought to be mere talk.

200. Leicester in Zeeland
                            Cologne, January 9, 1586.
    I now hear that England and France can send ships from Zeeland to the Baltic, but not to Spain, so the English will be able to continue their voyages to Emden with impunity.
    The Earl of Leicester brought some three hundred nobles with him from England. He had a splendid reception from the citizens of Middelburg, who stood to arms in full dress. He was also given a great banquet at the Town Hall. The Earl of Leicester seems to be a man of about fifty-two, very sagacious and of handsome appearance. He has already sent most of his troops to Holland, and is now at the Hague in Holland. He has summoned the States General to meet there so as to bring order into all affairs. The Earl of Leicester has with him as bodyguard fifty halberdiers in red cloth and fifty archers in like costume. He lives in great state. The marriage between the King of Scots and the Royal Lady from Denmark is said to be coming off.
    
    Anne, Princess of Denmark, 1574-1619, married in 1589 James VI, King of Scots, later James I of Great Britain and Ireland.

201. Peace Rumours
                            Antwerp, January 18, 1586.
    A rumour is going round among the people here to-day that before long a satisfactory peace will be concluded between Holland, Zeeland and Spain. This is chiefly because the ships in Spain have been let go. Also two Spanish ships have arrived in England. On one of them was an ambassador from the King of Spain, bringing His Majesty’s consent to a twelve years’ religious peace for the Netherlands, although the Queen of England demands one of twenty years. The Earl of Leicester has deprived of their offices all those in Holland who are absolutely determined on continuance of the war with Spain, but left alone those who counsel peace. The Earl says he was not sent over by his Queen to continue the war with Spain, but to strive in every way to bring tranquillity to these countries. Many therefore cherish a strong hope that more negotiations are being conducted in secret than can be avowed publicly. Also very few military operations are being begun at present.

202. Danish Marriage of James VI
                            Cologne, February 6, 1586.
    The story goes that the Queen of England’s envoy, who has been in Denmark for some months, and been very handsomely treated there, has certainly effected an alliance between the King of Denmark and that Queen. This envoy is staying in Hamburg and district and in Sweden. There many horse are being recruited in the name of the Queen of England. It is stated too that the King of Denmark has brought about an understanding between Denmark and England and the Hanse towns. The English have also sent an emissary to Emden to negotiate trade relations with that town.

203. Blockade of the Baltic
                            Antwerp, February 8, 1586.
    Letters from England of the 23rd report that eleven ships have sailed from the Baltic to Lisbon, and have probably arrived there. In order to get to Lisbon, they have steered a course which completely avoids the coasts and harbours of England, but it is announced from England that the Queen has had this way blocked by warships so that it will be impassable in future.

204. More Peace Rumours
                            Antwerp, March 15, 1586.
    Many travellers have come from England these days, and they tell us that the Queen there has given orders for the return home of all her warships scattered up and down the sea. Moreover the usual weekly post is going to London; it left at noon to-day. This is significant so long as England is not declared here to be at war with us. It is even thought the English rule in Holland and Zeeland will aim at nothing more than the conclusion of a satisfactory peace throughout the Low Countries. May the merciful God grant this.

205. Spanish Search for Drake
                            Antwerp, March 16, 1586.
    We hear from Spain that the Red Indians have killed four hundred English at Satuga. In Spain they are fitting out thirty large warships on which five thousand soldiers are to embark. They have to search for Captain Drake, who has ostensibly gone to Peru.

206. Spain and the Hanse Towns
                            Prague, March 20, 1586.
    Although the Hanse towns have long been petitioning His Imperial Majesty to afford them some remedy against the infringement of their privileges by the Queen of England, no improvement has resulted. Therefore these Hanse towns have once more petitioned His Majesty, and have announced that if the assistance required is not promptly forthcoming they will be compelled to come to an arrangement with the Queen aforesaid on their own account. This arrangement they will make as favourable as possible to their own trade. Now when the Spanish ambassador learnt this, and heard that the Hanse towns were about to enter into negotiations with the Crown of England, with the aid of the permanent Papal Nuncio to His Imperial Majesty he prevailed upon His Majesty to assure the Hanse towns in writing that he would help them to obtain their rights as quickly as might be. Whether they will be satisfied with this and desist from their project we shall see later on.

207. Drake in Santiago, Porto Rico, and San Domingo
                            Madrid, April 5, 1586.
    You have already learnt what the English did on the island of Santiago, and how they pillaged and set fire to everything and got clear away. But this unfortunately is not the end of it, for on the 27th March, news dated the 24th came here from Seville, that the English pirate, Drake, after all the damage he did at Santiago, took and plundered Porto Rico and the island of San Domingo. Thy say he has carried off and done damage to the tune of over two millions. He killed or ill-treated all priests and monks he could get hold of, and is fortifying himself in San Domingo too. They fear he has also taken Havana. If His Majesty does not soon provide assistance, no fleet will be able to sail from India or to come from there this year. This is of course a grievous loss and a great danger for all India, and one which hits trade especially hard. His Majesty had information about the plans of this Drake in good time, but paid no attention. Also he gave no orders to the Indian Council or any one else to intercept Drake. Nobody will believe this till we have to bear the shame and loss of it. Now we must expend much money, labour and trouble, and shall be unable to do any good at first. What is more, this will put a check on the success we hoped for in the Netherlands. They say His Majesty has given orders to get ready and equip the fifteen galliots lying at Seville and Lisbon, but not yet quite completed and insufficiently provided with soldiers, and thirty more ships too. But it is to be feared that, as is their custom, they will go about it so slowly that the enemy will manage to carry his plan through first, will fortify himself and do still more damage. May God Almighty grant in His mercy that all may soon be changed, and that this piracy may be withstood. As is also stated, His Majesty has ordered the six hundred thousand ducats sent three weeks ago to Barcelona for shipment to Italy to be brought back, as the cash will probably be wanted for the fresh water. If things had only been looked to earlier, we could have managed with a smaller sum.

208. France and the Porte
                            Constantinople, April 14, 1586.
    On the morning of the 11th inst. the French ambassador had an audience with Mesih Pasha, and the latter appears to have submitted his request to the Sultan in open Divan the same morning; namely, the restoration of the ancient privileges which France had had from the Porte for many years, but which had recently lapsed. As it was an express stipulation among these privileges that the English could only trade under the French flag either here or elsewhere in the Sultan’s dominions, the above-mentioned French ambassador has already begun and will continue to struggle to get the English ambassador away from this place and to bring the English Nation under his protection. He is said too to have laid a complaint about the serious injury done to the subjects of his King by the Barbary corsairs. He will no doubt try to double the figure for damages and demand five hundred thousand ducats compensation. But it is thought that in place of cash the French ambassador will be content with getting rid of the Englishman. He may perhaps make a mistake, for there is nothing the Pasha and the Sultan are keener about than money and they only think how to get hold of as much of it as possible. It is believed accordingly that the French ambassador will accomplish nothing in this direction without cash, if only the English ambassador pays a small sum down. To-day, as is customary, the French mission had audience in open Divan, and presented altogether forty costumes, twenty of satin and damask, ten of velvet and ten of cloth, together with gold and silver plate. This is valued at the utmost at a thousand pieces of gold. The Turks are not impressed and have said publicly that the Sultan spent more money on the ambassador’s banquet.



209. Defeat of the English near Grave
                            Antwerp, April 26, 1586.
    You have probably heard already that the English dug an entrenchment between the small town of Grave and the river. Thereupon Karl von Mansfeld collected his men to drive the English out of the trench again. The Spaniards charged first. They attacked the English alone and with such fury that they did not await the other troops, and after a long struggle drove the English out of the trench. This they levelled and put the English to flight. Fifteen hundred of them are killed and nearly four hundred wounded. Of the Spaniards two hundred are dead. The English had hoped to come to the assistance of this town during the fight. They failed, so the town will soon have to surrender.

    Karl von Mansfeld, 1543-1595, Prince of the Empire, son of the Imperial Prince Peter Ernst von Mansfeld, Imperial Lieutenant-General and Captain General in the Netherlands.

210. Netherlands Silk for England
                            (No heading, no date.)
    The Dutch and English have some ships stationed outside Dunkirk and Calais to stop navigation. The ships from Lisbon to Hamburg are said to be on their way, but it is not known how they will get through. The Italian, Carlo Lanfranchi, a trader, who was with the Prince of Parma at Brussels a few days ago, has requested His Highness’s permission to purchase some silkwares, and take them to the Court of the Queen in England. So this merchant has bought nearly twelve thousand pounds Flemish worth of all sorts of silkwares, and started for England with them yesterday.

    Carlo Lanfranchi, an Italian merchant resident at Antwerp, who maintained very good relations with the English and later on in combination with one Andrew de Looe was chief partner in a big Italian firm in London, which brought Lanfranchi’s letters to England and delivered them to Burghley. Both exerted themselves in vain for peace between England and Spain.

211. Danish Activity against Spain
         Drake at Nombre de Dios, Cartagena, and Panama
                            Cologne, May 1, 1586.
    The learnt at Middelburg on April 18 that the King of Denmark has sent fifteen warships with men and guns to Hamburg, and requires the city not to deliver any supplies to the Spaniards. The answer is not yet known. The Count of Oldenburg is said to have pledged himself to the King to deliver nothing to the Spaniards. The same request has been made to the city of Bremen. The English would seem to have concluded an agreement for one year with the Count of Emden, and the Hamburgers to have renewed their privileges for one year with the English. A despatch caravel from India brings news that the English corsair Drake has captured Nombre de Dios and two castles hard by and taken seven ships. He is even said to have annexed Cartagena and Panama. Earl Leicester is still at Utrecht, and has received much money by ship at Middelburg.


212. Drake at San Domingo
                            Antwerp, May 3, 1586.
    The Queen of England has given an English-born Captain, by name Drake, thirty-six ships. He has had twenty French besides, as well as some of Don Antonio’s, eighty warships altogether. With these he has taken the island of San Domingo, and fortified himself there with the help of the blacks. He seems to have liberated and armed the blacks who are slaves of the King of Spain, and to be building all sorts of fortifications there. But whether he will be able to hold them or will make off again with his booty is unknown, as the land is wild and desolate for hundreds of miles round. This news reached the Prince of Parma at the Court in Brussels ten days ago.

213. England and Denmark forbid Trade with Spain
                            Antwerp, May 3, 1586.
    Letters of the 24th from Middelburg announce that in England and at Utrecht notices have been made public sternly forbidding, on pain of death and confiscation of property, any ships to sail to Spain, Portugal or other places under the rule of the King of Spain. Also no goods from England, Holland and Zeeland may be sold to Spaniards. The King of Denmark has issued the same veto, and therefore vessels partly laden at Hamburg and Lübeck have been detained by order of the authorities until the ships from Spain and Portugal have come in, so that injury to ships and fighting men as well as to traders may be prevented.

214. Spanish Mission to Italy
                            Lyons, May 11, 1586.
    A Spanish mission has lately gone from here to Italy. The King wants many fighting men, for His Majesty has fitted out a strong fleet at Lisbon to offer stern resistance to the English, who have taken San Domingo. But it is not thought that he will accomplish much at present, and eighteen ships seem to have gone subsequently to reinforce the English, and they may be followed by some French ships any day.

215. English Reverse off Gibraltar
                            Paris, May 30, 1586.
    They write from London that five English ships coming from the Levant were attacked and taken by the Spaniards to the Straits of Gibraltar. The prisoners were sent to the galleys.

216. Nevertheless Trade and the Mails go on
                            Antwerp, May 31, 1586.
    You heard that six or seven weeks ago an Italian named Lanfranchi came from England to the Prince of Parma in Brussels. He went down the Scheldt to Zeeland and thence to London, with a quantity of silk-stuffs. A day or two since he returned from England, and brings with him for the Prince of Parma two fine horses and some handsome dogs. There is a lot of talk about him here, and many are surprised that this Italian is able to come here from England with dogs and horses, especially when they are for Parma, as it is much remarked in this kingdom that nobody brings animals from there. But letters from London arrive daily by post notwithstanding, and letters are being sent there from here without any hindrance.

217. English at Emden
                            Emden, June 2, 1586 (O.S.)
    An English Commissioner from the Queen of England and her officers in Holland came here quite recently. Immediately after the Count of Emden arrived, and the next day the Commissioner and other Englishmen were entertained at the Town Hall by the worshipful Council of this town. On the day following the Commissioner had an interview with the Count, and amongst other things required that the Count should abandon the preaching of the Augsburg religion which he causes to be held in a private house. But the Count does not wish to do this, and is taking a few days for reflection.

218. English Hold on San Domingo
                            Antwerp, June 21, 1586.
    Three or four days ago the representative of the King of Denmark visited the Queen of England with four powerful warships and two others, on board of which were two thousand men and one hundred and forty big guns. On the 9th they sailed back to Denmark. They were so magnificently received and entertained in England that it is wondered what their errand can have been. Letters from Seville report that the King’s fleet sailed recently to pay a visit to the English, who have occupied the island of San Domingo. But the English sailed out to meet this fleet with their own ships and mauled them so that they had to return to Seville. Upon this an embargo was laid on all English goods in Spain, and some write that the English living there have been expelled. The King has convoked his entire Spanish Council in Madrid.

219. A French Consular Report from Egypt
                    Copy of a Report of Paolo Mariano, French Consul
                    in Egypt, July 20, 1586. (Mariano is very well
                    informed about affairs in those countries and 
                    speaks their languages like a native.)
                        (Original in Italian.)
    I have received a letter of the 15th of May from Cairo, in which my friends inform me of the occurrence of events of the greatest importance. Pepper at Cairo has risen to 26 ducats. Thirty-six galleons and four Spanish galleys have come into the Straits of Suez. They have been to the port of Mecca, the approach to the Yemen, and have done much damage, and taken many prisoners and a lot of booty, for this district is very populous. They were accompanied by Mahomet Bey, Captain of Alexandria. This man is undoubtedly of Neapolitan birth, and used to be Captain of Mecca. The fleet sent out a pinnace to pillage near Aden. The boat was captured and the Spanish crew confessed that an additional fleet of forty galleys and twenty-five others was expected to construct a fortress in sight of Aden, in a place which formerly belonged to the Portuguese. But I am unaware that the Portuguese ever possessed anything except Aden. When the second fleet arrives, the other fort is to be put up. This is a very important and astonishing affair. And it is certain that they have evil designs upon this country. The people there are greatly alarmed and demand help from the Great Lord. This must be already on its way. Plague is said to have broken out at Mecca, but no report of it has reached me. I tell you this because it is possible that your business requires a knowledge of these occurrences, as trade to India might be the sufferer. Shippers in the Arabian Sea know about the circumstances, and so hesitate to entrust foodstuffs to the merchants of Aden. What they, and especially their representatives at Cairo, will do about it I do not know, as I have no news from that quarter. I desired to inform you of this for my own peace of mind and to your profit, all the more as the Bailo of Venice assure me they have not received the news yet. So I am the only one to pass it on. I beg your Magnificence not to doubt this special information, for I have received it from my friend in Arabic. I have this day visited all the government officials of Cairo, staying here with the excellent Ibrahim Pasha, and he assures me that the Cherif of Mecca has not yet transmitted the news to the Grand Turk. All were amazed and almost beside themselves at the importance of these matters. Given at Pera on the 15th of June 1586.

220. Tension between the Porte and the English and French Ambassadors
                            Constantinople, June 26, 1586.
    On the 18th inst. two galleys came here from Alexandria, bringing certain news that the King of Spain’s fleet has come from India by the Persian Sea to within three days’ journey of Suez, and intends to attack Aden. The ambassadors of England and France in open Divan lately brought serious complaints against the Barbary corsairs for having captured many French and English ships. When the Capudan Pasha took the side of the corsairs and answered both ambassadors rather rudely, the English ambassador, as I hear, did not restrain himself against the Capudan Pasha, and got a good talking to from the Grand Vizier. The Frenchman, however, declared he would stay here no longer, as the friendship of his King was esteemed so low. He would let his master know about it, and would certainly soon be recalled by him. Something would perhaps come of it later which would cause little joy here. Everything that had happened here he proposed, as he must answer for it later, to put on record with the Venetian Bailo.

221. Drake is raiding on his own responsibility, not the Queen’s
                            Antwerp, July 5, 1586.
    It is definitely announced that envoys are to come over here from England to negotiate a general peace with the Prince of Parma. For this he has full powers. The Queen of England asserts that she never gave Drake orders to make those attacks upon places belonging to the King of Spain, to inflict damage, and actually to continue to do so. This occurred at the instance of Don Antonio. We have news here that Drake has left San Domingo again, but where he has gone with his fleet we do not yet know, as we have had no letters from Spain this week, nor from France either. We only hear from Zeeland that many soldiers are coming over from England every day.

222. Plague in Constantinople
         Spaniards in the Gulf of Aden
                            Constantinople, July 9, 1586.
    Regarding the French and English ambassadors nothing new has happened since my last despatch, but both are said to intend to leave here as soon as possible. They, as well as the Venetian Bailo, have already lost several people from the plague, and several others are seriously ill of it. So they have taken up their residence outside the town, the Venetians not far away, but the Frenchman near the Black Sea, in order that they and their people who have not yet sickened may escape.
    My agent informs me this moment that there came by the post yesterday from Arabia Felix a Bey, bringing definite news that the Christian fleet from India has ravaged the whole coast along the Arabian Sea as far as Aden, and has slain over sixty thousand people. They are also said to have fortified an island, and thereby rendered navigation in this sea from Mecca to Suez quite impossible, and to have captured many Turkish ships as well.

223. English in Flanders
                            Antwerp, July 19, 1586.
    On the morning of the 16th inst. the English surprised and captured the small town of Axel in Flanders, lying about a couple of miles from the sea. Two companies of German mercenaries were inside, but not more than fifty men all told. The English would seem to have made away with all mercenaries whom they found under arms or on guard. When this was heard of here and at Ghent, horse and foot were sent to Axel to intercept the English. The latter had hoped to take the Ghent road and the small town of Hulst six miles from Axel. But they were mistaken. At Axel there is said to have been stationed an Austrian nobleman, Herr von Schönau, Lieutenant-Colonel of the Count von Barlaimont. But he made off, as he had guarded the town so ill.

    Florent, Comte de Barlaymont, d. 1626, Governor of the Provinces of Namur and Artois.

224. The Turks do not want Spaniards at Aden
                            Constantinople, July 23, 1586.
    Further news coming in and considered correct is that the Spanish fleet has already built a strong fortress at the most important point on the Arabian Sea, whereby the navigation of the Turks is entirely blocked. This has been pointed out to the Sultan, who has held a long consultation with the Grand Vizier. A Pasha is to be sent to Cairo, so that with all that he requires, especially wood which will be sent from here, he may build on the spot a powerful fleet for use against the Spaniards. The English and French ambassadors have, as they publicly admit, relaxed somewhat in their dispute until their masters, on receiving their reports, communicate with them as to their behaviour in future.

225. The Diet of Lüneburg
                            Hamburg, July 23, 1586.
    Towards evening this day the King of Denmark returned here from the Diet of Lüneburg. Besides His Majesty there were present:  His Majesty’s brother, Duke John of Holstein, the two Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg, the Administrators at Hall and Halberstadt, both Princes of Weimar and Coburg, the Dukes of Merseburg and Lüneburg, the representative of Duke Julius of Brunswick, because His Grace is ill of gout. Also present:  Duke Eitel Henry of Brunswick, who arrived at Lüneburg with the King of Denmark, and brought a large sum of money in gold, which he has sent to Brunswick, also an Earl from Scotland, a mission from England, an envoy from the King of Navarre and many other Counts too. All these were in Lüneburg together till the 6th inst. They held no meeting in public, but settled their business among themselves without secretaries. What the upshot of these negotiations may be is kept for the time very secret, but it is thought that anything which has been deliberated so long is finally decided and will be carried out.

    1. John, Duke of Holstein, 1545-1622, was brother to the King of Denmark.
    2. Christian I, 1560-1591, Elector of Saxony.
    3. John George, Elector of Brandenburg, 1525-1598.
    4. Joachim Friedrich of Brandenburg (became Elector in 1598).
    5. The Administrator of Halberstadt was Duke Henry Julius of Brunswick-
              Wolfenbüttel, 1529-1589.
    6. The Duke of Weimar was John of Saxe-Weimar, 1570-1605.
    7. John Casimir, Prince of Saxe-Coburg, 1564-1633.
    8. William, Duke of Lüneburg, 1535-1592.
    9. Laurence Bodley.
    10. Ségur.

226. Leicester burns Crops
                            Cologne, July 24, 1586.
    The Earl of Leicester is now at Bergen-op-Zoom. he has with him seven to eight thousand firehoops to burn the grain in the fields. It is to be hoped the Royal cavalry will stop him at this. Because he does not dare to meet the Prince of Parma in a stand-up fight, he tries to wreak vengeance on the standing corn.

227. Drake at Havana
         Is there to be an Armada?
                            Madrid, July 26, 1586.
    About that Drake or English pirate we have no news since he took the port of Havana and despoiled the inhabitants of fourteen hundred ducats. But Havana letters of May 4 report that Drake is on the island of San Antonio not far from Havana, to await the fleet there. Havana, however, was garrisoned with two thousand fighting men and had no fear of him. What the twenty galleys which sailed from Seville on the last day of May have accomplished we shall soon hear. God grant they may get in safe and bring out the fleet, so that it does not fall into the hands of Drake. A few days ago they declared here quite positively that some of his Captains had sailed away home from him, ships and all, because he had broken his word over the partition of the booty. There is constant talk of a mighty fleet which our King is to fit out next year, and send against England. But it does not look much like it at present, and as the custom is here they will go to work slowly, just as in everything else, and wait till the loss has grown very great.

228. Is there to be an Armada?
                            Madrid, July 29, 1586.
    Nobody knows whether our King’s fleet is strong enough to undertake an expedition against England. What preparations one sees conflict with the idea of a serious enterprise. On the last day of May twenty-five ships, among them eighteen well-found galliots, with three thousand soldiers on board, sailed from Seville for India, as is stated with orders to look for Drake, and drive him away and escort the fleet to Europe. But this cannot well be done before next March. It was announced recently that His Majesty has news from Alexandria that the ship Buen Viage has again arrived from India, and that the Santa Maria had not yet started. So one might, and God grant it, expect these two this very year. Since this we have had letters from Lisbon saying that a caravel has arrived there from the Azores, the sailors on which declare that they saw, not far from the above-mentioned island, two big ships which could only have been Indiamen. They tried to examine them, but failed from bad weather and contrary winds. There is much talk to the effect that these were the Buen Viage and the Sana Maria. May the Almighty so dispose and bring them both back safe!  That would be such good news!

229. English at Gravelines and Dixmude
                            Antwerp, August 2, 1586.
    The Earl of Leicester lies with his English troops ten miles away from Alschot. He seems to have been in the town himself because some soldiers there had mutinied. The town is said to be very strongly fortified, and although Mondragon is in Flanders with a strong detachment, he is accomplishing nothing against the English. With their supporters they made an attack against Gravelines, where the Governor had an arrangement with the English Captain, Lord Stanley, to hand him over the town for a sum of money. Now, when the English Captain with six hundred English soldiers arrived before this town last Saturday, and sent in his Lieutenant with some men, as he himself was suspicious, the inhabitants of the town killed these soldiers, about fifty in number. So the English Captain moved back to Dixmude, where his plans likewise failed.

    Sir William Stanley, 1548-1630, served first under Alva in the Netherlands, then went to Ireland where he, although a Catholic, served the Queen loyally for fifteen years, and showed great efficiency in fighting against the rebels. Later he seems to have been involved in the Babington conspiracy. In 1586 he fought with success in the Netherlands under Leicester. In January 1587 he surrendered Deventer to the besieging Spaniards, and then entered Spanish service. At that time he was completely under the influence of the Jesuits. Soon after he went to Spain to push on the invasion of England. In 1591 he was in Rome to consult with Allen and other enemies of the Queen. Subsequently he went often again to Spain, where he passed the remainder of his life in rather poor circumstances.

    Christopher Mondragon, 1510-1596, a Spanish General who became a Field Marshal in the Netherlands under Alexander Farnese.

230. Leicester is no use
                            Cologne, August 21, 1586.
    The longer the Hollanders and Zeelanders have their English and their Earl Leicester the less good they do. Leicester deposes officials wholesale, throws the most distinguished into prison, and replaces them by others who agree with him. By this means he will perchance soon come to a bad end. It is loudly asserted that he has sent out four Captains of horse, each one of whom is to recruit a thousand horse, each individual of which is to receive four Rose Nobles as recruiting money. He is believed to have sixteen hundred horse already, but they will not march unless a Prince or an Imperial City stands surety for their pay. The Viceroy of Ireland with two hundred and fifty horse and a thousand foot has again come as subordinate to Leicester. The infantry are said to be very poor stuff.

    The rose noble was an English gold coin minted from 1343 till 1644, current at various times for 6s. 8d. and 10s.

231. Drake is in Ireland or Scotland or perhaps London
                            Cologne, August 21, 1586.
    Although letters reach some saying that Captain Drake and his fleet have reached Ireland, others hear the report that with twenty ships and great wealth he has arrived in Scotland. He has brought with him as well eight rich Spanish ships which he took in the Spanish seas, and his arrival in London is expected every day.

232. Spanish Success in the Red Sea
                            Constantinople, September 5, 1586.
    A short while since the English Consul, now staying with the English ambassador here in order to push through some of his business with the Porte against French opposition, received reliable information from Cairo that the King of Spain had issued a proclamation at his new fortress of Cameroon and throughout Yemen that all those who would submit to him should be free of all taxation for fifteen years. It is thought that, owing to this, most of the population will submit to the King of Spain. Only feeble preparations for resistance are being made here. They say they must first have instructions from the Governor of Suez what preparations to make. Great though the outcry of people here was at first it has now completely died down. They seem to have become confused themselves and to be unable to make up their minds. But for the moment they say that more and more Arabs are adhering to the King of Spain daily. The longer he stays the more does the French ambassador lose the respect of the Turks. They recently carried off one of his servants by force, and thrashed his dragoman before his eyes, though the ambassador had his sword at his side. He is always quarrelling. Apparently the air of Constantinople no longer suits him, and he daily awaits his King’s order to depart.

    Cameroon. Not to be confused with the Portuguese settlement in West Africa.

233. Drake in London with Great Wealth
         The Queen shot at
                            Antwerp, September 6, 1586.
    London letters of the 29th ult. recently received announce that Drake the pirate has arrived in London from India with fifty to sixty ships. He is said to have brought great wealth with him, but the ships are not yet unloaded. They also write of an important case of treason against the Queen’s life. Monsieur de Guise had arranged with certain nobles to come to England, but the conspiracy was discovered, and some sixty persons, many of high birth, have been imprisoned. A man who came here from England recently says that this plot took place before his departure from London, and that an Englishman shot at the Queen. But before he fired, the bullet, without his noticing it, fell out of the pistol, so he missed her. Nevertheless the Queen’s hair seems to have been singed. The Earl of Leicester is stated to have pitched his camp between Utrecht and Amersfoort.
    Anthony Babington, 1561-1586, English conspirator. For some time he was a page to Mary Stuart and seems to have taken part in the conspiracy of Campion and Parsons, and then to have been in Rome for a while and to have been commissioned there to effect the liberation of Mary. In 1586 he assumed direction of the conspiracy in favour of the Queen of Scots, in which Spain also had a share. So sure were the conspirators of success that Mendoza actually wrote home about the impending death of Queen Elizabeth. Mendoza described Babington’s plot as the most serious of all those directed against the Queen. However, Walsingham’s spies kept watch over Babington, and in August 1586 he was arrested and in September condemned to death together with his confederates, Chidiock, Titchbourne, Thomas Salisbury, Robert Barnewell, John Savage, Henry Don, Edward Abington, Charles Tilney, Edward Jones, John Travers and others. Babington and five of his accomplices were dragged through London on hurdles and executed in Holborn on September 20.

234. The Wild Irish
                            Cologne, September 15, 1586.
    The Earl of Leicester seems to be assembling his army. There are about fifty-five companies of foot, and twenty-four troops of horse and fifteen hundred Irish as well. These Irishmen are almost all naked and have their bows and arrows with them. They are very quick runners, and there are also some hundreds of them who go on stilts the height of a man. They are to walk through the moats surrounding the towns and climb the walls.

235. What will King Philip do next year?
                            Madrid, September 20, 1586.
    Nothing has been heard of the twenty galleys which went to India to convoy the fleet home, but, as Drake seems to have reached England on August 8, it may be presumed that the fleet will be in by the end of October. The twenty galleys were not worth the money they cost, since Drake has come back unharmed. God grant that he may not, as they say, be fitting out a fresh fleet to do still more damage. There is indeed a rumour that His Majesty intends next year to equip a great Armada and make an expedition against England, and that the twenty galleys aforesaid are to be used for this. His Majesty is accumulating great quantities of cash, and this may be taken as a sign of preparations. So also the loan which His Majesty is getting taken up by the Frankfort Fuggers. May God Almighty grant that all may turn to the weal of Christendom, to peace and to unity. God forfend that the Turk, as is confidently asserted on all hands, should send a hundred galleys out next summer, as the Queen of England is supposed to have suggested. She is to help him to send these ships against Spain. If he did we should have enough to do with our own defence, and could do nothing against either England or the Netherlands. It is also rumoured that the King of Spain is to impose fresh taxes. The Florentines and Genoese are thought to be coming to our help with some galleys. This they have offered and consented to do. It looks too as though His Majesty had some great enterprise in view for next year. God dispose all for the best. Your Worship has probably heard that in August a corsair surprised and pillaged one of the Canaries, and carried off many Christians. When on his return he was about to pass through the Straits of Gibraltar, he was lost in a storm with his ships and all his booty, and thus he got his reward from God.

236. Plots against the Queen
                            Cologne, September 25, 1586.
    Under date of the 15th, it is reported from Middelburg that London letters of the 6th and 12th inst. bring news that noblemen are being daily taken to prison. Besides the Guises, who waited with a fleet and three thousand men at Biscay, French ships are thought to have been ready in other places to invade England. The Queen of Scots too is accused of complicity in the plot against the Queen of England. She was arrested when hunting, and is now watched more closely than before. Her suite has been removed, and two of her secretaries have been brought to London. Her papers also have been taken away and examined. In London many ships are being prepared, and the Englishman Drake has not yet dismissed his warships and their crews. Some of the warships of the Queen of England are lying at Portsmouth. Some ships from San Lucar are said to have arrived in London, but they only bring salt and news that the merchants in Spain are fitting out a fleet for India.

237. England and Turkey
                            Constantinople, October 1, 1586.
    The English ambassador is again energetically pursuing his intrigues against the King of Spain. He was recently in audience with the Grand Vizier, and urgently requested the equipment of a fleet against the King above mentioned. To this the Grand Vizier answered that he should write to his Queen, that she could be assured the Sultan would not be backward next spring, but she must spare no efforts on her part either. I hope however that I shall not witness anything of the sort, as we hear no more about it, and there is no sign to be seen of any such enterprise.

238. Zutphen. The Irish killed like dogs
                            Cologne, October 9, 1586.
    A week ago I informed you how the Rhine bridge has been prepared, and a redoubt placed on each side. The English thought that with their fresh men they could carry the strong redoubt on the right side opposite Zutphen. When they advanced upon it and began the attack, the Prince of Parma, stationed hard by, was warned, and he marched at once to meet the enemy. On the 3rd inst. he reached the main standard of the English, called the Blue Standard, hoisted a mile and a half from the redoubt which the English had attacked. He repulsed them completely and took fifty-six prisoners. Then with his entire force His Highness pushed forward and attacked the English, who were already storming the redoubt, with such effect that over a thousand were killed on the field. The English lost as prisoners many of their own troops and others. Amongst them were thirty wild Irish who look so strange that the devil himself would fear them. They at once begged to be killed and not to be taken before the Prince of Parma. So when His Highness heard this he proceeded forthwith in person to see and to examine them. But they refused to answer His Highness, and as they were found to be ill of the plague he immediately had them killed like dogs. There are four or five hundred of these Irish over here. Probably now that the winter is coming they will go back home for they are naked savages. Now when the English had retired, the Prince determined to give them no time, but pursued them with such fury that he routed their entire army and took eighteen colours. How many of them are fallen it is not yet possible to know, but as so many colours have been captured there are probably many dead. From the French, who were also in the battle, the Spaniards will get more loot than from the English and Irish.

239. Details of the last Conspiracy against the Queen
                            Cologne, October 23, 1586.
    We hear from Middelburg under date the 9th inst. that news has reached there from England that of the eighteen conspirators brought before the Courts, fourteen have been hanged. These confessed that they meant:
    1. To assassinate the Queen of England.
    2. To admit the French and Spaniards into the country.
    3. To liberate the Queen of Scots and put her on the throne.
    4. To burn down and loot the City of London.
    5. To murder the members of the Privy Council and other distinguished 
         supporters of Her Majesty.
    6. To burn the warships and appropriate the guns.
    7. To kill various knights and noblemen in the country.
    More conspirators are being imprisoned in England every day. The Queen has summoned Parliament to discuss what is to be done with the Queen of Scots, as she has not ceased to devise evil against the Queen of England.

240. Wrecks off Ostend and Savage Executions in London
                            Middelburg, October 23, 1586.
    Two days ago a couple of ships came over here from England, and though some thirty ships were lying at anchor over there, so that they might make the crossing in concert, the wind did not suit them, as it was blowing a gale, so they sailed back to London. One of the ships, which was sailing in company with the two above mentioned, was wrecked and all three were so driven by the gale that they got ashore on the Ostend sandbanks. There they lost all their sails and had to drift at the mercy of God. Finally the two ships reached here safely on the flood. On the one ship all the passengers and the German mail are said to have been lost. Those who came over on the two ships which were saved report that fourteen of the conspirators against the Queen of England have been executed. Some were quartered alive, among them a Jesuit, others executed with the axe, others again with the halter. One among them was dragged at the horse’s tail from prison to scaffold through the streets. His mother had offered to give as much money as the horse could carry from the prison to the place of execution. This mother had also offered to maintain at her own cost a company of mercenaries for so long as the war should last in Holland and Zeeland, if only her son might be kept in prison for life. All she desired was to save his life and shield him from so shameful a death. But this was quite useless, and the course of justice was not interfered with. Those executed implicated the Queen of Scots in the conspiracy in order to destroy her. Parliament is assembled to judge whether this Queen has not forfeited her life. After the execution of these fourteen persons a new plan was discovered, to shoot the Queen out hunting. So five people, all of English birth, nobles and courtiers of the Queen of England, were at once imprisoned and a few days later quartered alive.

241. Zutphen. Was it a great Spanish victory?
                            Antwerp, October 25, 1586.
    It was recently reported how at the fort here the big gun was fired and the big bell rung because the town of Zutphen had been provisioned and the English defeated. This was later put in print, but, as the servants of the municipality by order of the magistrates subsequently confiscated these bulletins and took them away from the vendors, it may be assumed that the victory was not so great as was boasted when they gave it out.

242. Incrimination of Mary Queen of Scots
                            Antwerp, November 1, 1586.
    The announcement comes from Zeeland that the Earl of Leicester has given permission by licence, which has to be purchased, for ships to sail to Spain, Portugal, France and other places and to export merchandise, but with the exception of munitions and food-stuffs. On September 20th and 21st, O.S., fourteen of the conspirators against the Queen of England were executed. They confessed that the Queen of Scots was the instigator of this conspiracy, wherefore Commissioners have been despatched to examine her.

243. Arrival of part of a Fleet from New Spain
                            Madrid, November 6, 1586.
    God be praised, the fleet from New Spain has arrived safe at San Lucar. What gold, silver and merchandise it brings for the King and for private individuals I will report later, also how eight of these ships were lost, though the crews and cargoes were saved. It is thought that the continental fleet which is to bring seven millions in gold and silver has not yet assembled, and will not come out till next spring. May the Almighty in His loving-kindness protect and guard from harm and woe the fleet which sailed from Seville on October 23, and is to bring back twelve millions. Further news that I hear is as follows. With the arming of the so-called Armada against England progress is small and slow. It is true that in the last few days some Spaniards have agreed to make a loan to His Majesty amounting to one hundred and fifty thousand ducats, the money to be delivered at Lisbon in one month. And with it some soldiers, brought there from Andalusia, are to be paid. Then some new warships are to be completed. But what will finally come of the thing next spring will allow us to see.

244. Trial of Mary Queen of Scots
                            Cologne, November 13, 1586.
    It is announced here from Middelburg that the English Captain Drake arrived there on October 30, and proceeded to the English camp. He has brought over £50,000 in cash, and as much more in bills as the Queen of England could raise through English merchants. At Rouen in France English ships and property have been detained because a pirate stole to the value of £4000. So about £6000 in costs will be entailed. Letters dated the 8th have reached Middelburg from London. In them it is confirmed that many members of the nobility and of the Council, with two thousand horses, have ridden sixty miles away from the city to conduct a trial of the Queen of Scots. It is thought she would not be indicted in this manner if she alone had caused the conspiracy against the Crown, but, as so many lives have been lost because of it, further proceedings are to be taken against her.

245. Death of Sidney
                            Cologne, November 20, 1586.
    Our letters from Middelburg, of the 6th inst., report only that the English Lord Sidney has died of the gunshot would received before Zutphen. His body will be sent over to England for burial.

246. Spanish Success at Sea
                            Antwerp, November 22, 1586.
    Letters from Madrid in Spain dated the 19th ult. came here this week. They announce that of the English warships, a good number of which sailed from England to loot in Spain, fifteen have been sunk by the Spanish fleet. It is also reported that His Majesty is making great preparations in Spain and Portugal for some enterprise against England in the spring. In Holland they hear that the Earl of Leicester has gone to attend the Parliament in England, and that from each province and town under the jurisdiction of the Queen of England he will take with him two representatives. Parliament will certainly meet in December.

247. Complaints from Algiers
                            Constantinople, January 4, 1587.
    Last week some nineteen Englishmen were brought in here from Algiers. They seem to have done much damage there with an English ship, as they looted a lot and kidnapped many Turks and Christians. Moreover, it has been heard here that the Spanish galleys have apparently carried off fourteen of the best Algerine galliots.

248. Condemnation of Mary Queen of Scots
                            Antwerp, January 17, 1587.
    In London letters of the 1st inst. they write that Parliament is closed, but is summoned again for the 3rd or 5th of February. An edict seems to have been issued declaring that the Queen of Scots has forfeited her life. but the Queen of England does not wish justice to proceed further, and will only keep the Scots Queen prisoner. The final decision of Parliament in all this ruinous struggle is awaited with much eagerness by every one. It is said that the Queen of England aims at absolute control in Holland and Zeeland, but certain Holland towns will not concede this.
    See Fugger News-Letter (First Series), Letter 77, Death Sentence on Mary Queen of Scots.

249. Further English Outrages on the Spanish Coast
                            Lisbon, January 21, 1587.
    The news I have to report is that the galliot of the Duke of Florence, which was lying at Cadiz for two months, came in here to-day. The English pirates can be seen in quantities off our coast now. Yesterday with nine ships they appeared off Cape St. Vincent and intercepted many salt ships bound hither from Cadiz and other ports and laden also with wine and other things. They have also carried off two other ships from Brazil lying off the fort of the harbour of St. Vincent. This fort could not rescue the ships because it had no powder. It is really pitiable how little trade there is in these dangerous times. Here one can detect little of any preparation for an Armada. Great stores of food and provisions are being collected. The fleet which came here last year from Biscay is refitted, twenty big ships and twenty-four little ones. They are supposed to sail out from here daily to guard the coast, but most of the soldiers who were on board, and others too brought from Andalusia, have run away.
    The Grand Duke of Florence was Francis I, Grand Duke of Tuscany, 1574-1587.

250. French Intercession for Mary Queen of Scots
                            Cologne, February 6, 1587.
    The King of Denmark’s envoy, son of His Majesty’s governor, has been graciously dismissed by the Prince of Parma. His Highness presented him with a gold chain. But as he was travelling from Brussels the freebooters of Bergen-op-Zoom captured him and carried him off there. But, since he is a representative of Denmark and his King has offered to be an intermediary in the peace with England, he was allowed to go on again. They say that His Royal Highness will send Monsieur de Champagney and President Richardot to England. In the last letters from London we read that Parliament has deprived the Queen of Scots of all her Royal robes and dignities. Her lodging is said to be draped entirely in black. But the French and Scotch envoys are still there, begging for the life of the Queen.
    Jean Grusset, called Richardot, 1540-1609, President-in-Chief of the Privy Council of the Netherlands. Despite the strict Catholicism of his family he threw in his lot with the rebellious provinces of the Low Countries, but re-entered Spanish service on the request of Prince Alexander Farnese. The most delicate diplomatic affairs were entrusted to him. In 1597 he was made President-in-Chief of the Privy Council and maintained this position under Archduke Albert.
    Frédéric Perennot de Champagney, 1530-1595, son of the Chancellor Perennot de Granvella, who served Charles V. He was Governor of Antwerp, and President of the Flanders Council of Finance. He espoused the cause of the rebels and fought against Margaret of Parma.

251. A fresh Plot traced to the Queen of Scots and the Guises
                            Antwerp, February 14, 1587.
    In letters of the 24th ult. from London it is reported that more treason against the Queen of England has been discovered. Some French are said to be in prison because of this, and the French ambassador has been confined to his lodgings. Some English gentlemen are said to be in prison too. It is stated that this treason originated with the Queen of Scots and the Duke of Guise. From Brussels it is announced that the citizens at Haarlem and in Guelderland have expelled the English soldiers quartered there and submitted to the King of Spain.
    In addition to Monsieur de Belliève, specially sent to London to save Mary Stuart’s life, the permanent French ambassador was Monsieur de Chasteauneuf. The latter was accused of complicity in the conspiracy against Elizabeth contrived by Stafford, but he was innocent, and the error was promptly recognized.

252. English Treachery in Overyssel
                            Antwerp, February 14, 1587.
    The report of the 7th inst., that the town of Deventer has submitted to the King of Spain, is founded upon truth. The town was occupied by eight hundred English and Irish soldiers. Their Colonel was an Englishman, whose brother is still Custodian of the regalia in England. He had an understanding with Verdugo, the Governor of Groningen, the Corporation of Deventer and the citizens, and thus they gradually drove the English soldiers from the town and admitted Spaniards in their stead. The town has made a four years’ agreement with the King of Spain. The English in Bergen-op-Zoom are also said to be ready to surrender the town to the Prince of Parma.
    Francis Verdugo, 1531-1595, Admiral-at-Sea, Royal Spanish General-Field Marshal, fought with great success for Philip II in the Netherlands. For instance he defeated the English Colonel Norris near Noordhoorn in 1581.

253. Elizabeth opposed to the Execution of Mary
         Recall of Leicester
                            Antwerp, February 21, 1587.
    Yesterday letters of the 7th inst. came from London. They report that some envoys have waited upon the Queen of England to intercede for the life of the Queen of Scots. It is unknown what they have effected, though it is not believed that the Queen of England will permit her to be executed. The French ambassador is said still to be confined to his lodgings. It is also announced that the envoys of Holland and Zeeland have arrived in London, and that these provinces have entirely abandoned themselves to the Queen of England. An English ship is said to have reached England from Spain despite the detention of all ships there, and to have reported that English ships in Spain are in all cases forbidden to sail. So the Queen of England is having all large ships, foreign and English, detained and armed. She has six war vessels composed of her four big warships and of foreign ones lying off Dunkirk in order to keep them safely there. In place of the Earl of Leicester it seems that Lord Russell is to be Governor of Holland and Zeeland. From France we hear that the property, persons and ships of all English have been seized by the King, and from Brussels that the Court intends to forbid all trade with England and that open war is to be declared against the Queen of England.
    Sir William Russell, Baron Russell of Thornhaugh, 1558-1613, Leicester’s companion in the Netherlands and support in difficulties with the States General. Later on he became Governor of Flushing, then Viceroy of Ireland, where he successfully fought the rebels.
    See Fugger News-Letter (First Series), Letter 79, Execution of Mary Queen of Scots.

254. Execution of Mary Queen of Scots
                            Middelburg, February 26, 1587.’
    We received news from London this week that judgment had been passed on the Queen of Scots, but that successful efforts had been made to change the sentence into one of imprisonment for life. Since then, however, there has been trouble of all sorts in which this Queen has been implicated. Therefore she was executed in the castle of London on the 20th inst. It seems that she went to her death unwillingly and that in her last moments she accused the King of Spain, the King of France and the Pope of having failed to keep the promises they had made her and of having forsaken her utterly. On hearing this the people in the city were delighted. An order was subsequently published that all those sailing as privateers should attack every vessel coming from France and spare no one. Captain Drake is to hold himself in readiness to take measures in case France or Spain should make any move against England, but such good preparations have been made everywhere that it will not be easy for Spain to do anything. Much arming has also been done, and the Earl of Leicester is again expected here with some thousands of men, as the Queen is entirely taking up the cause of these countries and giving them every assistance.

255. Peace Negotiations
                            Antwerp, February 28, 1587.
    Monsieur de Champagney is said to be conducting secret negotiations for peace with Lord Burleigh, Lord High Treasurer of England, in order to see whether it is possible to enter into formal negotiations. On this business a certain Andrew de Looe seems to be travelling backwards and forwards, and to have been sent from Brussels this week with a promising reply.

256. Ships impounded on all hands
                            Madrid, March 2, 1587.
    A special messenger to His Majesty from Lisbon arrived to-day. He took horse on the 25th ult. and reports that all Hamburg and other ships there have been seized. The Marquis de Santa Cruz has visited the largest and finest lying in the harbour and has given them orders to unload their cargoes within four days, since His Majesty requires them for His own purposes. The others, not being wanted, hope that the Marquis will set them free. Six galleys and other ships with soldiers from Italy are expected daily. They say almost a hundred ships have put out from England, destination unknown. The Marquis has sent many caravels to the islands and other places. God grant that loss may be averted.
    Alvaro de Bassano, Marquis de Santa Cruz, 1510-1588, a really efficient Spanish Admiral, who died just before the Great Armada put to sea. He was replaced by the incapable Medina Sidonia.

257. Archduke Mathias to marry Arabella Stuart
                            Antwerp, March 7, 1587.
    In letters of the 18th ult. from Hamburg we read that the Archduke Mathias has arrived there quite incognito with four or five attendants. He left there to visit the King of Denmark, and will pass thence to England to marry the Queen of England’s cousin.

258. The Guises will fight England
                            Antwerp, March 25, 1587.
    This week we had news from France that the King of that country will not consent to war with England. So the Guises and their adherents will carry on the war on their own account. With this object they have already assembled a large number of horse and foot in Picardy. They had meant to filch Boulogne from the King, but as the Governor heard in time he was able to frustrate their attempt.

259. Disputes between Holland and Zeeland
                            Cologne, March 26, 1587.
    Letters from Middelburg of the 19th inst. report that parliament in England is still assembled. The States General would not consent to hand over their country to the Queen, and that is why Parliament is still sitting. The Zeelanders seem ready to stand in with the Queen. In Holland the States General have held a Council and determined not to allow themselves to be ruled over by the Queen of England. They have apparently made Count Maurice of Nassau Governor and the Count von Holloch Lieutenant-Governor, and propose to despatch garrisons to Utrecht, Haarlen, Briel and other places, but these towns refuse to receive them. It looks as though Holland and Zeeland would separate.
    Philipp, Count von Hohenlohe, 1550-1606, repeatedly called in these letters Count von Holloch. He was a son-in-law of William of Orange, came to Holland in 1575 and fought for the freedom of the Netherlands. In 1577 he brought about the capitulation of Hertogenbosch and was placed in supreme command of the northern portion of the Low Countries. His quarrels with the States General were frequent and serious, and his attempt to relieve Antwerp failed. Round him centred all the opposition to Leicester, and after the latter’s departure he retained his command under Maurice of Nassau.

260. Success of English Diplomacy in Turkey
                            Constantinople, April 5, 1587.
    Contrary to all expectation, the Spanish mission has got the worst of it, and the English embassy, with five thousand ducats which it has thrust into the jaw of the Hoja of the Sultan, holds the field. Not only have the treaties already drawn up been snatched from the hands of the mission, but last Friday it received instructions from the Sultan that it might depart and that, if its master the King of Spain desired to seek and obtain the friendship of the Sultan, he should send, like other Christian sovereigns, a regular and respectable embassy to the Porte.
261. Elizabeth’s Anger with Davison
         Drake has sailed
                            Middelburg, April 9, 1587.
    Mr. Buckhurst came here three days ago to conclude the agreement with the States General of Holland, as the deputies of the States General in England had submitted to Her Majesty that certain articles settled with his Excellency the Earl of Leicester must be agreed to. The chief grievances remedied are those concerning the assembly of so many foreign soldiers and their introduction into Holland without consent of the States General, the pillaging of the open country, trade with neutral districts, and appointment of Count Maurice as High Admiral. It is not thought that the Earl of Leicester will bring so many troops with him as last year. They were mostly good-for-nothing people who roamed the land as beggars. it is believed that he will raise as many men here as he wants. Additional advices from London state that General Davison has been in danger of his life, because without the knowledge and consent of the Queen of England he despatched the sentence of death of the Queen of Scots and affixed the Great Seal to it. Her Majesty is greatly displeased because he did not consult her beforehand and because the Queen of Scots was executed by the common headsman in derogation of her royal blood. Captain Drake is said to have sailed from London with thirty vessels, of which sixteen are the Queen’s and are large and very well found. He has gone westwards, and it is supposed he will lie in wait for the Indian fleet.
    Mr. Buckhurst. See note on 265.

262. Denmark closes the Baltic
                            Cologne, May 14, 1587.
    It is announced that the King of Denmark has stopped in the Sound nearly five hundred ships from Holland and Zeeland, as well as from the Baltic and England. Moreover from the English ships he has taken more than a hundred articles and then made them sail to Danzig and other places. This news is confirmed at Amsterdam, with the addition that so much property was taken from the English ships because a few months ago the English garrison at Bergen-op-Zoom took the Danish envoy prisoner.

263. Will Drake be recalled?
                            Antwerp, May 16, 1587.
    They write from Brussels that it has been announced at that Court that the Queen of England has had a pinnace made ready for sea in great haste and sent after Drake to tell him to return with all his warships. This because Andrew de Looe has managed so well that it is at last possible to conclude a satisfactory peace. But in letters of the 15th inst. we hear that in Brussels there is no tidings of this pinnace having started from London. So people here do not know what to believe. The story looks like empty talk to confuse people and leave them under a false impression. The best informed opinion here is that Drake has sailed straight to Portugal and Cadiz. A number of warships and fighting men would seem to be assembled there to meet the Indian fleet with its riches and escort it home. So in this direction Drake would have a pleasant reception.

264. Drake takes Cadiz
                            Madrid, May 30, 1587.
    On the 24th. inst. they wrote from Cadiz how Francis Drake, the English pirate, made a surprise landing there with forty-eight ships great and small, not all warships. He pillaged and stripped about fourteen ships laden with all sorts of merchandise and lying in the roads, and stayed there for some days. Those ships which he could not take with him he afterwards burnt or sank.  Thereupon the chief citizens with women and property fled to Seville and elsewhere, although the King at once sent five hundred men to the fort as garrison, together with some galleys. On the 25th inst. news again came from His Serene Highness the Cardinal Archduke Albert of Austria to the effect that this Drake, after sailing away from Cadiz, first proceeded to Cape St. Vincent and remained there ten days with his fleet, and after the 15th went to the province of Algarvia situated in Portugal, not far from the town of Lagos. There he landed some two thousand men and drew them up in order of battle, as though the enemy were in sight and forced to fight him. With his troops he advanced in battle order to within half a mile of the town of Lagos, whereupon the citizens in great haste ran up on the walls, and the Governor made a sally with three hundred horse. On this Drake slowly retired. Now, although the Governor pursued the marauders with his troopers, neither side attacked or harmed the other. On the following day, that is the 16th, Drake landed again with some troops and appeared before a fortress named Sagres, situated near the town of Lagos. he took it after two assaults, as he had brought with him scaling ladders and other apparatus for attack. Although one hundred and fifty Portuguese soldiers were in the fortress with the monastery and the altars and pictures in the church. The monks fled to safety. Then he came to two castles, from which the garrisons had likewise fled. These also he burnt down and razed. All the cannons, armour and weapons, as also all the wood which he found there, he carried off to his ships. On the 18th he arrived with his fleet off the port of Lisbon, and on the morning of the 19th he passed between the two harbour forts. And although Don Alonzo de Bazan, brother of the Marquis de Santa Cruz, sailed out with the seven galleasses which he commands at Lisbon, he began to skirmish with his cannon, and the firing and skirmishing lasted till six o’clock in the evening. But the firing of the big guns from the enemy’s ships was so severe that the galleasses were ultimately forced to retire, without producing any effect on the English. When the English fleet had also withdrawn a little way in its turn, a few soldiers were sent out to prevent the English from landing. But early on the 20th inst. the English fleet left the river and went out to sea, in what direction is unknown. Thus far the Lisbon letters of May 25. His Sacred Majesty of Spain has slept long enough, and from pride, preoccupation or parsimony has paid no attention to such visitors. But now he has been roused afresh and must hurriedly protect himself with money and troops. The marquis de Santa Cruz is already arming, and money and troops are being sent him in great haste. He is to sail from Lisbon as soon as possible with thirty-two well-armed galleasses and pursue the enemy. As news has been received that Don Antonio of Portugal is to sail from England with another fleet, and it is likewise impossible to know whether he too will not come to Portugal and join Drake and whether one of the fleets or even both may not again make for India, His Sacred Majesty has ordered the Duke of Medina Sidonia to sail out as quickly as possible and pursue the enemy with 32 galleys which are already fitted, and 32 big warships also which are being prepared. With the utmost despatch His Majesty is sending money to Seville in Andalusia and to Biscay, where some large ships are likewise being constructed for war, and to all places where it is required. Troops are being raised all over Spain. Recently also fifteen hundred soldiers, all trusty Spaniards, arrived in Cartagena from Sicily. Another two thousand are expected from Italy. It is said too that men are to be transferred from Germany to Italy as garrisons in place of those who have been brought to Spain.
    There is moreover some fear that the Portuguese might have an understanding with Drake of Don Antonio. Now what will happen over all this time will show. A large sum of money was recently sent for the King from here to Barcelona through some Genoese and Messrs. Fugger of this city. It should have gone to Italy and the Netherlands, but whether much of it will reach the Netherlands and the unhappy troops there we shall hear shortly.
    P.S.—Just this moment His Majesty is sending a Knight of Malta, who is a famous Italian architect, with some workmen to Cadiz, to pull down the old fortress and build up a new one.
    italics: Albert (Albrecht Vii, the Pious), Archduke of Austria, 1559-1621, Governor of the Netherlands. He was married to Isabella Clara Eugenia, Infanta of Spain, daughter of Philip II, 1599-1633. In 1579 he became a Cardinal and lived lo

