Victor von Klarwill, e.d. <i>The Fugger News-Letters. Second Series. Being a futher Selection from the Fugger papers specially referring to Queen Elizabeth and matters relating to England during the Years 1568-1605, here published for the first time.</i> tr. L.S.R. Bryne. (New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 192): 

1. Tension between Spain and England
                                    Rome
                                    June 12, 1568
background: News reaches us that the King of Spain has sent orders to the English Ambassador to withdraw at once to a distance of ten miles from Court. The reason for this, as many think, is that the Ambassador has had in his possession or has distributed certain pamphlets teaching the doctrines of the Huguenots. The Ambassador has obeyed the command and has without delay despatched his Secretary to Queen Elizabeth.
        John Man, Dean of Gloucester, 1512-1569, became English Ambassador to Madrid, 1567. Owing to alleged remarks about the Pope, he was banished first from Court, then from Madrid. Recalled from Spain, June 1568. A somewhat incapable diplomat.

1-2. Turkey, Arabia, and Egypt
                            Constantinople
                            September 28, 1568.
    The army of the Grand Turk has marched to the Red Sea in order to chastise the insurgent Arabs who have occupied Aden and Yemen. Whether this will be successful cannot be foretold. The Beglerbey of Damascus was sent on in advance to oppose the Arabs, but he dallied until they had captured the two most important fortresses. He was therefore recalled on August 26. He is powerful, rich, and has many good soldiers. Possibly he may have joined the rebels. It is stated that this has already occurred and that he intends to seize Egypt, as his wife is a daughter of the King of that country. Therefore 65 galleys have been already despatched to Alexandria to hold the people in check and prevent disturbances. When the fleet on its passage reached Cyprus it put into Famagusta to water and was well received by the Venetians. It is stated that the fleet is to return in October and that vigorous preparations are being made in the Arsenal, though with what object is unknown. To-day a canopy from Mecca was carried in solemn procession round the town here. It is intended for the grave of the late Soliman. The Turks paid it every honour, kissed it, and sang the Song of their Prophet Mahomet.

2. Rome on the alert against the Huguenots
                                       Rome
                                       January 29, 1569.
    There is no news of importance to report this week from this Court. However, the Spanish Ambassador, who returned from France on Sunday evening, brings tidings that His Majesty of France is informing His Holiness that the rebels and Huguenots have risen to great power by help of the Queen of England. It has been discovered just lately that she has sent to them at La Rochelle several cargoes of provisions and munitions and 3000 English soldiers to fight for the German League. The Duke of Zweibrücken is sending the Prince of Orange several thousand horses, so the King has given his brother the Duke of Anjou 400,000 francs to train and pay the army and march by January 15 against Condé, who has retired into the passes of Lorraine.

2-3. English Raiding and Trading in Spain
                                Seville
                                February 11, 1569.
    I have heard here exactly what the English have been doing in New Spain. A Fleming, who has been acting as interpreter to them there, writes that they have sailed into all harbours in the mainland, have sold their wares in part amicably, in part by force, and have pillaged all they could. They are said to have carried off property to the value of 600,000 ducats. Here this is considered to be an exaggeration. Still the amount is estimated at 3 or 400,000 ducats. Accordingly, all English here were arrested the day before yesterday, but released yesterday on bail. The same course is to be followed at Cadiz and San Lucar also.
        The espisode alluded to is the raid of Sir John Hawkins (1532-1595), who had descended upon the Spanish colonies the year before. On this expedition Hawkins lost many of his comrades. To obtain their liberation he entered into negotiations with the Spanish Ambassador to England, Don Guera des Espes, and offered to enter Philip II’s service himself. The King and his ambassador were taken in and handed over the prisoners. But Hawkins did not keep his promise. He became later Treasurer of the English fleet, fought successfully against the Armada, and died at sea on one of his expeditions off Porto Rico.
footnote: See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 4, Piracy of the English.

3-4. Spanish Ships and Gold brought into Plymouth
                                London
                                March 4, 1569.
    Twenty-two ships from Spain and Lisbon have recently come into the port of Plymouth here. Others are said to be on their way. These ships were brought in by force. They contain amongst other things spices and a Spanish Mission. The latter has arrived in London. Every day the Spaniards ask permission of the Court to journey with the despatches to Flanders. They bring little news from Spain. The Beggars at the Exchange here announce that the Moors have taken half Granada, but the Spaniards to not admit this.
    For some time the Spanish Ambassador was escorted by a guard, but this has recently been dispensed with. The Beggars dislike this, for they would prefer that open war should break out between Spain and England. About one hundred Spanish sailors are here, most of them begging for alms. But those who go to Meeting-house get their fill of fish and white bread.
    The Spanish gold now here is said to come from Plymouth, ninety-five chests of it as well as another fifty-four which ought to have got to Antwerp. It amounts all in all to nearly £100,000. What the Queen will do with it time will reveal. It is said that new coins are to be struck from it. Such of this money as belongs to the merchants Her Majesty is gracious enough to allow to be changed in Antwerp, but what belongs to the King of Spain, her brother, she thinks it right to withhold from the Duke of Alva.
        The Beggars. In April 1566 about 250 Netherlands nobles, who had bound themselves under a covenant known as the “Compromise” to resist the encroachments of Philip II, presented, under the leadership of Louis, Count of Nassau, and Henry, Count of Brederode, a list of grievances to their Regent, Margaret of Parma. As the Regent showed signs of alarm, one of her councillors named Berlaymont exclaimed: “What, Madam, is your Highness afraid of these beggars (ces gueux)?”  The name was adopted and the insignia of the Beggars or Malcontents became the wallet and bowl with the motto: “Fidèle au Roi jusques à la besace.”  The first rebellion was crushed by Alva, but in 1569 the Prince of Orange placed himself at the head of the party and formed the Gueux de Mer, or Sea Beggars. Their capture of Flushing and Brill in 1572 was the beginning of the War of Dutch Independence.

4. Spain and the Moors
                                          Madrid
                                          May 15, 1569.
    background: The Captain-General of Castile, with twenty-three, or some say twenty-four, galleys on board of which are some Italian soldiery, put out to defend the sea against Barbary. But he encountered such a storm that four galleys and two pinnaces seem to have been lost with all hands. The rest have been so mauled and scattered that it is uncertain where they all are. It seems however likely that they will be unseaworthy for the present. The Captain is reported to have arrived at Palamos with two or three galleys. It would appear to be a judgment of God, for certain soldiers coming from the Kingdom of Naples boasted loudly that they would drive off the Moriscos. Now Andrea Doria has been written to  to come at once with his galleys. God grant that in this manner the Moriscos may be reached.
    A report is just now current, that the English with a few strongly armed ships have descended upon the small town of Ferrol, situated in Galicia, not far from Corunna, and have made away with or slaughtered the whole population. The English are stated to have announced that they are now sailing to India to wipe out and avenge upon the Spaniards the shame and loss recently suffered at Vera Cruz.
        Fernando Alvarez de Toledo, Duke of Alva, 1508-1583, Spanish states-man and general. Philip II sent him to the Netherlands to deal with the unrest there. Alva carried out his task with such cruelty that resistance only became more violent, so in 1573 he was recalled. In 1580 he conquered Portugal for Spain.
        footnote: Giovanni Andrea Doria, Prince of Malfi, Spanish Admiral, d. 1606.

5. Piracy in South America
                                          Madrid
                                          May 26, 1569.
    A recent but unfounded rumour here has it that the inhabitants of Cusco in Peru have revolted. However, I hear nothing so far about this from Seville. On the 21st the Indian Council published the news from Seville that a passenger arrived there from Santo Domingo relates how Don Melendez has captured from the corsairs in Guiana and Porto Rico three ships and a quantity of silver too, looted along the coast. I have been unable to learn whether the pirates were English or French.

5. The Turks arm against the Arabs
                                  Constantinople
                                  August 22, 1569.  The Grand Turk is to hold his Court at Adrianople this winter. The Arsenal is very hard at work, as the Turks wish to use their full power against the Arabs next year. They have regained Aden from the Arabs. The Governor is a Portuguese turned Turk. The Arabs are struggling hard to get Aden back again. The Sophi’s son-in-law went on a pilgrimage to Mecca with his wife and five hundred retainers. He was attacked by the Arabs and most of his retinue was slain, though he himself and his wife escaped. The Grand Turk has apologized to the Sophi, expressing regret that his disorderly subjects should have done this.
        Sophi, the vulgar name for the Shah of Persia. See note on 425.

5-8. Treasure Ships reach Spain
                                Madrid
                                October 1, 1569.
    News has just come from Seville that the fleet of eight sail arrived safely from the Spanish Main at San Lucar on September 28. These eight ships are supposed to be bringing 340,000 ducats for the King, and over one and a half millions in gold for merchants and private individuals. It is hoped that an additional fleet will arrive next April, as many vessels which have made the Indian voyage are still due. The two fleets which came from New Spain and Peru this year brought in more than three millions, and this knowledge and desire. The French write that their King Francis, owing to the tricks played on him during his reign by the English, always had on his lips the following epigram:
        ‘Anglicus, Anglicus est cui nunquam credere fas est,
             Tum tibi dicit ave, tanquam ab hoste cave.’
In like fashion she summoned Brederode the Walloon to appear before her and broke faith on this occasion also.
    The real reason for this expedition and the further damage it will cause we shall soon learn. May the Almighty protect us from still worse things!
       footnote: Henry, Count von Brederode, 1531-1568. First of all in Spanish service in the Netherlands, then one of the most violent opponents of Granvella, and one of the leaders in the revolt against Spain and of the Beggars. He was one of the iconoclasts and died in exile, outlawed in perpetuity by Alva. His property was confiscated.
8-9. Rebellion in Chile and Peru
                                    Seville
                                    July 29, 1570.
    Concerning the Spanish Main, a ship has arrived from Havana and on it a passenger from Cartagena. He brings the unwelcome news that in Peru and Chile, that is to say the more distant settlements, numbers of people have rebelled owing to the severe taxes and imposts inflicted upon them daily. Moreover, they are furious because they are forbidden to plant vines, olives, corn, and the like. Also all that they have been cultivating for some years past has been set on fire and destroyed. It is the King’s will that all such articles should be exported from our own country and sold there, in order that his revenue and taxes both within and without the land may flourish exceedingly. The King was not a little put out that they should have thus presumed to be contumacious. This news at the present juncture is very bad, but not surprising, for if the load of a beast of burden is added to daily without regard to his strength but with thought of profit alone, he will lose heart and fall. Certain people who, except for the tribute in gold and silver which they pay to the King, desire to be free of all taxation, and have consequently often taken up arms against the King, walk freely abroad here, their only desire being to enrich themselves by war and disorder.

9. The Queen of Spain in the Low Countries
                                Antwerp
                                August 19, 1570.
    Last Monday the Queen of Spain was solemnly escorted into Nimeguen, but the ceremony was I hear less splendid than was said. The Duke of Alva forbade any gentleman of this country to take part in the tourney or jousting. This was reserved for the Spaniards. So our gentlemen were displeased. Subsequently she passed on to Breda, and is to arrive to-day at Bergen-op-Zoom and there await a favourable wind.
    Yesterday letters came from England announcing that the Queen there is arming busily, and over thirty ships are said to be already fitted out. Further preparations for war appear to be made daily. What her intentions are in all this time will show.

9. She is escorted by an English Fleet
                                Antwerp
                                October 7, 1570.
    The English fleet which escorted the Queen into Spanish waters has returned home again. It is said to have left Her Majesty on Thursday, September 28, and the English declare that there is no doubt the Queen has already reached port, as she then had a strong favouring wind.

9-10. More Tension between Spain and England
                                Antwerp
                                February 3, 1571.
    It is announced as certain that the dispute between England and these countries is as good as settled and that Tomaso Fiesco may go over any day to make final arrangements with the Queen.
    According to letters however which arrived here on the 20th of last month, the Queen has ordered all property belonging to subjects of the King of Spain to be sold. Moreover, she has commanded her Ambassador here to leave everything standing and proceed to England, for she declares that she sees that the property belonging to Spaniards is being filched from her by means of Orders and the like. Where the truth is in all these tales time will show, as so many lies are told daily on ’Change that it is wearisome to write of such things.
footnote: This may mean Sir Thomas Gresham, 1519-1579, a well-known financier and founder of the Royal Exchange. His father before him, Sir Richard, was Lord Mayor of London and Court Banker to Henry VIII. Sir Thomas was always entrusted with the raising of loans for the English Court, and spent most of his life at Antwerp. On Elizabeth’s accession, Cecil, a business friend of his, came into power, and this greatly increased his influence. Sir Thomas carried through some very difficult and complicated transactions for the Court, and supported the Revolt in the Netherlands out of his own pocket. The Antwerp Exchange served him as a pattern for that of London.

10. Would that we had Peace!
                                Antwerp
                                March 3, 1571.
    I hear they are busy in England returning the confiscated property. When they will have finished is uncertain. A sensible peace would be advantageous to both parties, as one country can hardly prosper without the other.

10. Would that we had Peace!
unknown
unknown
    According to a recent report the English have concluded peace with these countries. But methinks it has again fallen through, and nothing will come of it.

10. A Conspiracy against Queen Elizabeth
                                Antwerp
                                June 9, 1571.
    Yesterday fresh letters again came from England reporting that two Doctors, a Portuguese and an Italian, and likewise an Apothecary have been arrested for plotting the death of Cardinal Châtillon. They proposed to kill the Queen as well, so they will probably be treated with a carving knive.
footnote: Odet de Coligny, 1517-1571, brother of Admiral Coligny, the first victim of the Bartholomew Massacre. He was excommunicated and fled to England, where he actively supported the French Huguenots. He was poisoned.

11. The Alençon Marriage   
                                Antwerp
                                June 30, 1571.
    About the conspirators who poisoned the Cardinal de Châtillon I have heard nothing more. A man who came from England last week tells me they have been arrested more on suspicion than as being proved guilty of the crime. These people cannot be trusted. London letters of the 25th of this month state that the agreement between the Queen and our Court concerning the confiscated property is again afoot. God grant the property be soon returned to its owners. Marshal de Damville, brother of Admiral de Montmorency, is said too to be going to England to negotiate a marriage between this Queen and the brother of his King. But it appears that under this pretext he is to conduct other negotiations. A strange world!
        footnote: Henry I, Count of Damville, then Duc de Montpensier, 1534-1614, Constable of France. His brother, Francis, Duc de Montmorency, 1530-1579, favoured the Huguenots, and was sent to England in 1572, where he concluded an offensive and defensive alliance with Elizabeth. He escaped the Massacre of St. Bartholomew only by accident.

11. The Norfolk Conspiracy
                                Antwerp
                                October 27, 1571.
    London letters state that this Queen has again arrested many gentlemen and continues to do so daily. Amongst them is the Duke of Norfolk. They have been laying a fresh plot to kill the Queen, to proclaim a new King, to set free Her Majesty of Scotland and marry her to the newly proclaimed King. But the plan has failed this time, and several of them will lose their heads. To this nation will happen what befell the Frogs. They would not have the Log for King, and so the Stork was given to them and he ate them all up. What will occur next time will show.

11-12. Swedes and Muscovites
                                Danzig
                                July 20, 1572.
    In Moscow the scarcity is so severe that the Grand Duke has been unable to put more than a hundred thousand men into the field. Because of his tyranny the people are unruly. Last winter the King of Sweden treated them pretty roughly with thirty thousand men. Now in summer fighting is impossible, but in winter it can begin again.
    On an island near Narva the Swedes with a few thousand men have blocked all traffic and navigation, and quite recently drove back an English ship laden with cloth and salt. It has now arrived here in Danzig, bringing all its papers.
    Sweden, Poland and their neighbours have combined to stop all imports into Russia, so the Musdovite has sent the King of Denmark a quantity of money in order that the sea passage through the Sound may not be blocked. In consequence Imperial and Local Councils are to be held in Sweden and Denmark, and at Lübeck as capital of the Hanse Towns, to agree about access to Russia and to select with all due deliberation some suitable spot on the Baltic as market place and repository.
   footnote: Ivan the Terrible, 1533-1584. John III, 1568-1592.

12. Norfolk executed
                                Antwerp
                                September 5, 1572.
    Fresh communications from England announce that this Queen has caused the Earl of Norfolk to be executed.

12. The Vicissitudes of Trade                  
                                Seville
                                January 17, 1573.
    The officials of the Casa de Contractation are despatching with all speed news received last night that a small boat arrived from New Spain announces that the fleet which left here last July bound to that country reached there safe after a rapid voyage. But the harbour on the island of San Juan de Lua has been burnt down and the goods unloaded there, belonging to the merchants, have suffered damage to the value of seventy to eighty thousand pesos. There is always much labour and sorrow in traffic with New Spain.

13. Hopes of Peace between England and the Netherlands 
                                Antwerp
                                March 5, 1573
    This week an Italian has come from London who says there are strong hopes in England of effecting before long an agreement for at least two years between England and this country. The matter is said now to rest with the Duke of Alva alone. He sent a special despatch to the Ambassador in England this week. God grant that some such decision may be reached. It is also reported as quite possible that France may declare war upon England. Similar rumours come France, especially from Rouen, but there is no indication of the reason. If there is any truth in it all, the only reason possible is that the English favour the Huguenots.

13. Hopes of Peace between England and the Netherlands
                                Antwerp
                                April 19, 1573.
    Secretary Scharnberger writes from Nimeguen that our soldiers are now stationed in front of Harlem Lake. He reports also that in letters from London of the 10th inst. the treaty of peace between England and this country is confirmed. So we ought to believe that there is some truth in it, but until the treaty is proclaimed here I shall put no faith in the matter, as for some time we have been made game of over the news from England.

13-14. The Beggars
                                Antwerp
                                June 4, 1573.
    Twelve English ships arrived in Sluis this week, six laden with wool and six with cloth. Five more are said to have come in afterwards, of which the Flushing men took and carried off three not far from the Sleus. This is strange news, as nobody supposes the Beggars likely to attack the English. But they spare no man, and may regret this shortly. A letter from London dated the 1st inst. states that Lord Montgomery with his fleet has put into the Isle of Wight in England, but it is not reported that he has accomplished anything of note with his forces. Many messengers have come to the Duke from England during the last few days and his Grace has despatched a few to England in his turn. Moreover some English gentlemen, ostensibly on their way to take the waters at Spa, have waited upon the Duke of Medina Coeli at Maestricht. No doubt there is something in this. So it may almost be believed that the Queen of England will come to an understanding with our King, and will hand over to him a few ships for use against the Water Beggars. This will soon be known one way or the other, and I will communicate at once with your Honour.
        Gabriel de Montgomery, d. 1574, a French nobleman who mortally wounded King Henry II of France in a tourney in 1559. He became a Protestantin England and fought on the side of the Huguenots. After the Massacre of St. Bartholomew he went to England, and from there led a fleet for the relief of La Rochelle in 1573, but he was forced to surrender to the French, and was beheaded by order of Queen Catherine de Médicis.
        footnote: John Louis de la Cerda, Duke of Medina Celi, d. 1607.

14. The Beggars
                                Antwerp
                                June 14, 1573.
    As I have already reported to your Honour, the men of Flushing took three ships from the English not far from Sluis. There is no doubt about this. But it is now asserted that they have been set free again. The day before yesterday an English gentleman arrived who is said to be an Earl and one of the bodyguard of that Queen. He likewise goes to take the waters at Spa. With this exception nothing worthy of report has occurred as regards England.

14-15. Rumours of War and of Peace
                                Antwerp
                                July 19, 1573.
    Fresh letters from England report nothing beyond that about a dozen warships are being fitted out there on pretence of clearing the sea of corsairs. I am informed, however, that they are really intended for our King. Of Lord Montgomery’s fleet and of his plans no particular mention is made. In France they feel sure of peace, but do not yet know whether it is officially confirmed in Paris.

15-16. English Money for the Low Countries
                                Antwerp
                                January 3, 1578.
    This week the Marquiws de Havré arrived in Brussels from England. He had a gracious farewell from the Queen and brings good news for the governments of these countries. Her Majesty has granted them a fresh loan of eight hundred thousand florins. This is confirmed in letters from London of the 23rd ult. M. de Havré brings a small amount with him in cash and a Royal Letter Patent or Authorization for the governments to raise the money on Her Majesty’s account. She gives her own guarantee, and in addition the Parliament and the City of London consent to pledge themselves as principal sureties to repay the money within a definite period. The general opinion is that there will be no lack of lenders, as investment on such security is safe. Should, however, none be found in this country, it is supposed that the government will send some one to Germany with orders to raise money there. We shall soon see what success the government will meet with. It will be necessary to remind them of their debt to Messrs. Fugger in order either to bring in the money or to get good security for it. God grant they may pay much of it off. We should then endeavour to put things in order for you and make a good profit. If we cannot obtain this security, and war should break out again with Don John of Austria, there will be serious risk of getting nothing back at the moment. May the Almighty deign that things grow better than they seem like to.
    They say the Queen is sending the government a regiment of English mercenaries, and has offered three months’ pay for them at her own expense. So there will be plenty of men on both sides and the only question is which paymaster will hold out longest.
        footnote: Charles Philippe de Croy, Marquis de Havré, 1549-1613, one of the leaders in the Revolt of the Netherlands against Spain. He was commissioned by the governments of the Netherlands to negotiate with the Queen for her support of the Revolt. In 1578 he went over to the Spaniards, and in 1594 represented the Circle of Burgundy at the Diet of Ratisbon and exerted himself greatly to promote peace between Spain and the Netherlands.
    Don John of Austria, 1547-1578, a natural son of Charles V. Under his leadership was gained the great victory of Lepanto over the Turks at sea on October 7, 1571. In 1576 Philip II made him Governor of the Spanish Netherlands, and there until his death he fought with varying success against the insurgents.

16. Don John of Austria and the English
                                Antwerp
                                February 1, 1578.
    Of fresh news we have little here that is pleasing. The English Ambassador recently came to Brussels to get speech with Don John. But His Highness refused to grant him audience or even to speak with him, on the ground that he knew what his King’s orders were and that the Englishman had better return from whence he came. The authorities of Brussels would have to be informed on his behalf that he would manage to give them their just reward. According to the English Ambassador Don John proposes to visit Brussels on the twenty-fifth. The English Ambassador started back to London yesterday. What the Queen will do after she receives his report will not long remain unknown. God grant that all may pass off better than it seems like to.

16. Don John of Austria and the English
                                Antwerp
                                February 16, 1578.
    Two days ago there came over another English Ambassador sent by that Queen. Of his mission nothing can be learnt, but it is said that he goes back home in a few days. It would seem that most of the English and Scotch, who were to come to aid this country, have remained behind in England. Apparently this Queen has little desire to incur great expense unless some towns on the Flanders coast are pledged to her. It may be imagined that this Queen will think twice before she sends a refusal to the King of Spain.

17. The King of Spain asks too much
                                London
                                March 18, 1578.
    Don Bernardino de Mendoza, Ambassador of the King of Spain at the Court of our Queen, is said to require Her Majesty to assist the King of Spain in reducing his subjects in the Netherlands to due obedience again. She is also expected to lend money to th4e aforesaid King. The Ambassador requires moreover that divers galleys, which His Majesty proposes to despatch to the Netherlands, should in case of bad weather be permitted to put into English ports. The answer is not yet known.
    The Marquis de Havré immediately on arrival was received graciously in audience at our Court, far more graciously than the Spanish Ambassador. Our Queen at once caused to be drawn for him credits on the City of London to the total of £100,000, and Her Majesty is said also to be providing a considerable sum in cash.
footnote: Bernardino de Mendoza, Spanish savant and diplomat, was entrusted by Philip II with important missions to France and England. He left behind him a quantity of scientific writings, and died blind as a monk in a Spanish monastery at the beginning of the seventeenth century.

17-18. Troops assembling
                                Antwerp
                                March 24, 1578.
    I myself have seen the Palsgrave John Casimir’s stabling for three hundred horses. The Queen of England will contribute her share also. Schwarzburg brings into the country two thousand men for the government, the Marquis de Havré fifteen hundred. In all, with Schenk’s men, there will be nine thousand. Stabling and pay-money are already provided.
    footnote: John Casimir, Palsgrave of the Rhine, 1543-1592, took a German army to reinforce the Huguenots and supported the French Protestants and the Revolt in the Netherlands. He busied himself about an alliance between England and the Netherlands, and, with English support, led auxiliary troops against Don John of Austria. As Elizabeth refused further payment, he went in person to England, where instead of money he received the Order of the Garter. Later on he hesitated between Catholics and Protestants, but ultimately joined the Protestants in the Empire and was a dangerous opponent of the Catholic Hapsburgs.
    Adolphus, Count von Schwarzburg, 1547-1600, a German soldier, fought first under Philip II in the Netherlands and under Henry III against the Protestants, and later with some credit against the Turks.        Martin Schenck von Wydeggen, soldier of fortune in the Netherlands War of Liberation, b. apparently in the forties of the sixteenth century. In 1580 he was successful on the Spanish side, but in 1585 he entered Dutch service and conducted the war in the harshest and most grasping manner. In 1589 he tried to surprise Nimeguen but was driven back and drowned in the Waal.

18. The Queen seems to lean towards the Protestant side
                                Antwerp
                                March 25, 1578.
    Yesterday two ships with the Scotch, who escaped the most recent defeat at Namur, passed through here on their way to Brussels. They had come to England through France and were re-equipped and rearmed by the Netherlanders in London. The Marquis de Havré is said to have written from England that the soldiers recruited in Scotland and England are ready. But their despatch awaits the arrival of the German troopers sent to the government here. This forenoon a messenger came to the Prince from the Queen of England, with news that an Ambassador has arrived in England from Spain, and that the Queen is reporting his business to the Prince. The rumour is that without the knowledge and advice of the Prince the Queen will give no answer to the request of the Spanish Ambassador.
        footnote: Don John of Austria, reinforced by his nephew Alexander Farnese with 20,000 veterans, routed the Netherlanders at Gembloux near Namur on Jan. 31, 1578.
        Prince. The Prince of Orange.

18-19. But she will not be lavish
                                Antwerp
                                April 5, 1578.
    We have just this moment heard from England that this Queen will send over no soldiers and only money enough to recruit for the Palsgrave Casimir five thousand horse and nine thousand Swiss. A portion of these is said to have been raised already and Ernst von Mandelsloh on the Palsgrave’s behalf is to negotiate with the government. The Marquis de Havré is still at the English Court, and the Queen is to assist the government of this country with £150,000. On the 1st inst. again a ship with Scotch mercenaries passed here for Brussels.
        footnote: Ernst von Mandelsloh was Colonel in the service of Albert, Margrave of Brandenburg, by whose orders he brought a regiment to the Prince of Orange. He fought long in the Netherlands.

19. No Hope of Peace
                                Antwerp
                                April 23, 1578.
    Although a meeting to negotiate peace has taken place at Malines and several envoys of the government were present, there is no hope of a favourable result, for the Ambassador of the Queen of England has come here from Don John with very bad news. He will soon report to his Queen and the Parliament. As for Spain, we hear from Madrid on the 5th of this month that on the last day of last month Secretary Escobedo was stabbed riding home from Court. So far it is unknown who did it.
footnote: Escobedo was Private Secretary to Don John of Austria. Antonio Perez, 1559-1611, Secretary of State to Philip II, had Escobedo murdered with the King’s approval for threatening to betray the intrigue of Perez with Princess Eboli. Because of his overbearing character Perez ended by falling into disfavour with the King and fled to Saragossa in Aragon, outside the jurisdiction of the Inquisition. The King tried nevertheless to bring him before the Inquisition, but a formidable revolt broke out at Saragossa in consequence. Perez fled to France and later to England, where he vehemently supported the policy of hostility to Spain.

19-20. Don John is outspoken
                            Antwerp
                            30 April 1578
    Monsieur de Havré has again come here from England. The Queen there is said to have agreed to all that the government wants, and the English Ambassador who was with Don John has again gone from here to England. He will inform the Queen that Don John intends, if successful, to bring her realm just as completely under the subjection of the King as the Low Countries. He stated as much in public.
    The six hundred English soldiers, who came over here lately, have gone to Flanders. Another five hundred of these men are encamped around our town. They came here two days ago from Zeeland and are also being taken to Flanders. Three thousand more are daily expected from over sea. Their Colonel arrived yesterday. So the government are collecting a considerable army, and are said to be ready to put up a permanent camp again by the middle of May, as Herr von Schenk’s nine hundred troopers have already arrived, and are to pass by the town to-morrow. They are to be followed within two days by their Colonel and an additional three hundred horse. Count von Schwarzburg’s two thousand five hundred horse are also expected daily. They are to arrive by Whitsunday at latest. At the same time Eitel Henry of Brunswick is to enter the country with three thousand horse for the government. But when the Palsgrave john Casimir will appear is not yet known here. They say the Queen of England is sure to be ready to pay three thousand horse and six thousand foot of his contingent.
footnote: Eitel Henry, Count von Kirchberg of the House of Brunswick, German soldier, fell in the Cologne war, 1583.

20-22. Letter of Queen Elizabeth to the Archduke Mathias
background: (Original in Latin.)
    Elizabeth by the Grace of God Queen of England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, to the Illustrious Prince and Lord Mathias, Archduke of Austria, Governor of the Netherlands, Our beloved friend and relative, Greeting. We believe that you know how deeply We feel and must always feel that Our own destiny depends on the peace and prosperity of the Netherlands. We have therefore always striven for it and are ready to do so now, for there is no nation on alliance with which We have a more ancient or more pressing claim than on the Netherlands. Also there is no people which, owing to the favourable situation of its country and to other conditions, more greatly requires Our friendship than the Netherlands, for they have with Us all business and affairs in common. This has caused that We, in this most unhappy war, have beheld with pain these Provinces devastated, and We find it seemly that We should send to Your Excellency and to His Government these distinguished gentlemen, to wit; Henry Cobham of the highest nobility and Warden of the Ports and Our Privy Secretary Francis Walsingham, that they may devote themselves to the matter of making peace. In so far as is possible their desire is to smoothe away difficulties and to bring the affair to a happy conclusion. We beg Your Excellency therefore to receive these Our Ambassadors with the graciousness which is natural to you, and to show them in every detail not less confidence than you would were We to speak of the matter face to face. Tell Me frankly what Your Excellency holds conducive to the public weal of the Provinces. We wish Thee most gracious Lord and most Noble Excellency a very long life.
    Given at Our Residence at Greenwich on the 31st6 of May 1578 in the twentieth year of Our reign.
                    Your good cousin,           
                                ELIZABETH.
 To the Most Illustrious Prince and Lord Mathias, Archduke of Austria, Governor of the Netherlands, Our Most Beloved Friend and Cousin.
        footnote: Sir Henry Cobham, 1538-1605, an English diplomatist of distinction. Ambassador in Paris, 1579-1583. He tried hard to place Don Antonio on the Portuguese throne.
        Archduke Mathias of Austria, 1557-1619, subsequently Holy Roman Emperor, son of the Emperor Maximilian II, lived on constant bad terms with his brother, Rudolph II. During the disturbances in the Netherlands the Duke of Aerschote and the Marquis de Havré invited him to assume power there in place of Don John of Austria. Without the knowledge of the Emperor he went to the Netherlands, but had to share his authority with William of Orange. He returned to Austria in 1580. Subsequently he fought against the Turks without success, and as the Emperor was now mad, combined with the other Archdukes to depose him from the hereditary dominions.
        Sir Francis Walsingham, 1530-1590, as a young man took a five years’ educational journey through Europe, and, after the accession of Elizabeth, was elected to Parliament. In 1570 he was sent to Paris to assist Sir Henry Norris, the permanent English Ambassador, and to support the cause of the Huguenots. He soon became permanent Ambassador himself and concluded an offensive and defensive alliance with France in 1572. During the night of the Bartholomew  Massacre numerous English took refuge in his house. He was succeeded by Dr. Dale in 1573. From that time onwards he became a responsible Secretary of State, sharing the whole burden of State affairs with Cecil. His chief attention was devoted to foreign policy, and in this he received powerful support from Leicester. By desire of the Queen he was also frequently employed in Scotch affairs. His greatest efforts were given to the discovery and suppression of the plots against the Queen’s life, and he was specially concerned in the execution of Mary Stuart. Before the Armada sailed his spies in Spain were particularly active and successful. Walsingham died in great poverty because the Queen invariably omitted to reward him in accordance with his deserts.

22. English Money again
                                Antwerp
                                May 28, 1578.
    Three days ago some uncoined gold and silver sent by the Queen came over from England. It has been taken into the English House and is to be minted there. The amount seems to be uncertain. Some think it to be about £100,000, but I do not estimate it at above a quarter of this. It is probably recruiting money for John Casimir’s troopers and a month’s pay for his infantry.

22-23. More Troops
                                Antwerp
                                June 11, 1578.
    M. de Bossu with twelve hundred horse and twenty-seven companies of foot has gone to meet the German cavalry and to escort them into this country. They will be close here in a few days. The government want to take their infantry out of the towns and erect near Brussels a permanent camp for which great preparations have already been made. They are collecting eight thousand horse besides the Palsgrave John Casimir’s five thousand which will soon be here with him together with eight thousand foot as well. It is said that His Serene Highness is to become Commander-in-Chief of the entire army of the government on the express wish of the Queen of England. She is to send over several gentlemen and a Secretary to remain with the government during the war.
        footnote: Maximilian Hennin, Count de Bossu, General, first in Spanish service, then in that of the Prince of Orange, d. 1578.

23-24. Lord Howard arrives at Antwerp
                                Antwerp
                                June 28, 1578.
    Lord Howard, Ambassador of the Queen of England has arrived here. He was received with great ceremony and escorted in by Count Egmont, the Prince de Chimay, Monsieur de Merode, and by representatives of the City of Brussels. His Serene Highness our Governor sent four horses of his Bodyguard to meet him. Immediately on his arrival the Ambassador informed John Casimir in the name of his Queen that he was commissioned to assist him in the impending war by word and deed.
footnote: Charles, Lord Howard of Effingham, Earl of Nottingham, 1536-1624, Lord High Admiral of England, received the Order of the Garter in 1574 and in 1587 was made Lieutenant-General and Commander-in-Chief of the Fleet against Spain. His second in command was Sir Francis Drake. In 1596, when the Spanish danger threatened afresh, he again received the supreme command, while Essex was to command the troops on land. Until his death Lord Howard was in the highest favour with the Queen and with her successor.
Philip III de Croy, third Duke of Aerschote, Prince of Chimay, 1526-1595, played a great part in the revolt against the Spaniards, became Governor and Captain-General of Flanders and fought against Don John of Austria. He submitted to the King of Spain in 1579. His son, Charles de Croy, fourth Duke of Aerschote, 1560-1612, married a Calvinist and from 1582 kept the name of Prince of Chimay only. He became Captain-General of Bruges, re-entered Spanish service, was made Captain-General of Artois by Archduke Albert, and finally became President of the Belgian States General, and Duke of Croy. He left very interesting memoirs.
Philip, Count Egmont, b. 1558, son of Count Lamoral Egmont executed in 1568. At the beginning of his career he was an enthusiastic adherent of the Netherlands Revolt, but went over to the Spaniards in 1579. In 1580 he was captured by the insurgents and kept a prisoner till 1585. When liberated Philip II made him a Knight of the Golden Fleece and Governor of Artois. In 1590 he fell at Ivry fighting for the League.
Bernard de Merode, b. about 1529, d. about 1590, one of the most zealous participants in the conspiracy of the Netherlands nobility against Spain. He fought with William of Orange against Granvella and Margaret of Parma, wasoutlawed in perpetuity, took Malines in 1572, attended the Congress of Cologne in 1579 as Commissioner of the States General of the United Provinces, and died as Vice-Stadholder of Friesland.

24. Don John intransigent
                        Antwerp
                        31 August 1578
    Our representatives, who, together with the Embassy of His Imperial Majesty and of the Queen of England, were at Louvain, returned yesterday to Malines. They announce that the peace negotiations have entirely failed. The reason was that our representatives as well as the Imperial and English Ambassadors refused to enter into communication with the Ambassadors of Don John. However, I hear this evening that they have been invited to meet afresh. The chief difficulty is said to be that Don John will leave the country only on condition that his men receive three month’s pay, and this the government will not grant.

24. The English Representatives return home
                            Antwerp
                            September 28, 1578
    The two Ambassadors of the Queen of England are to go back home very soon. The government have presented each of them with a handsome gold chain and hangings for one room, said to be worth together about seven thousand Rhinegulden. According to all accounts they leave in great content.

24-25. John Lesley, Bishop of Ross
                            Strasburg
                            December 24, 1578.
    Several days ago there passed through here a Scotch Bishop by name John Lesley, Bishop of Ross. He comes from Rome where he has lived some years. He has been also at the Court of His Imperial Majesty, and likewise with the Bishops of Bamberg, Würzburg and Metz. He had intended to go to Paris, but to pay one more visit on the way to the Duke of Lorraine. However a day’s journey from here, when he entered the town of Phalsbourg belonging to the Palsgrave George John, he was arrested and remains there locked up. This is said to be due to divers intrigues which have been traced to him. I have been informed that in this respect he is very cunning and that earlier he worked hard for the Queen of Scotland.
footnote: John Lesley, Bishop of Ross, an accomplice in the Ridolfi plot and one of the most zealous, dangerous and indefatigable partisans of Mary Stuart. He left England in 1574 and went first to France and then to Rome, where he was incessantly active on behalf of the imprisoned Queen. In 1578 he was sent by the Pope to work among the Catholic Princes for Mary Stuart. On this journey he was arrested. Soon after he became Vicar-General at Rouen. In 1587 he would have been allowed to return to Scotland but declined to do so and remained in France. He died near Brussels.
Henry I of Lorraine, third Duke of Guise, Prince of Joinville, 1550-1588. He was the most formidable and vigorous opponent of the Huguenots, the fighting head of the Catholic League, and one of the chief authors of the Bartholomew Massacre. In conjunction with Philip II he aimed at the French Crown and thereby caused civil war in France. He induced Henry III to issue the Edict of Reunion. As he was becoming more and more dangerous to the King, the latter had him and his brother murdered at Blois, Christmas 1588.

25-26. The Prince of Orange intervenes
        background: (Abbreviated.)
    Points for consideration submitted by the Prince of Orange to the Government of the Netherlands and the answers which they made to him.
    First. The government are requested to decide in what manner the town of Breda can be restored to liberty. Answer. This matter is entirely left to the discretion of His Excellency.
    Second. His Excellency receives an exhaustive report of how ill the Queen of England takes it that the government have neglected to inform Her Gracious Majesty of the present condition of the Netherlands, although, as the government are well aware, she had offered them at all times advice and assistance. The Prince therefore considers it essential that a responsible person should be despatched to Her Majesty with a detailed account of all that has occurred since the arrival of Don John in the castle of Namur. This responsible person must also petition for a suitable sum of money, say one hundred and fifty or two hundred thousand crowns, since it seems as though money alone could avert further misfortune from the Netherlands. Answer. The Marquis de Havré is commissioned to report to the Queen on these matters.
    Third. It is necessary to equip and keep in readiness a large number of mercenaries on horse and on foot. Answer. Besides the six regiments which remain under their previous commanders, a regiment of Scotch and a regiment of English mercenaries, together with three hundred horse, are to be taken into the service. The Queen of England should be requested to put the Earl of Leicester in command and to send him over here. His advice will be followed in all points and an additional regiment of the Prince’s infantry will be placed at his disposal.
        footnote: Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, 1532 or 1533-1588, the well-known favourite of Queen Elizabeth, who made serious claims to her hand. In 1563 Elizabeth wanted to marry him to Mary Queen of Scots. In 1585 he was Commander-in-Chief of the English Expeditionary Forces in the Netherlands, but showed little capacity for leadership and was recalled in 1587.

26. Scotch at Ghent
                                Cologne
                                January 29, 1579.
    The inhabitants of Ghent have taken six companies of Scotch to guard their town. Of these five have entered the town and the sixth is billeted in a neighbouring hamlet. They have behaved so ill that they have been slain by the inhabitants.
    Duke John Casimir has gone to England with a small retinue. What he will settle with the Queen time will show.

26-27. John Casimir in London
                                Antwerp
                                31 January 1579.
    On the twenty-fourth of this month Duke John Casimir arrived in England and reached London the same night. The Queen has given orders that greater honour be shown to His Serene Highness than to any foreign Prince for many years. On the next day, the twenty-fifth of this month, His Serene Highness had an audience with Her Majesty.

27. Massacre of a Scotch Wedding Party
                                Antwerp
                                February 8, 1579.
    At Devermonde the cousin of Captain Tangerlos has married a Scotch Captain. The wedding was celebrated with the utmost pomp and magnificence and a tourney was held in addition. After the breakfast and festivities were over, the bridegroom had caused a magnificent banquet to be prepared five miles outside of town. At this also there was much joviality. When they were afterwards starting home and apparently had insufficient conveyances, the soldiers, about sixty in number, intended to guard the bridegroom, the bride and their friends, were all of them drunk and seized carriages from two or three countrymen. This angered the countrymen greatly, for they had previously suffered much from the insolence and violence of the soldiers. So they sounded the tocsin and all the countrymen from the neighbouring villages gathered together. When the wedding party saw this they retreated to the house where the banquet had been held. In spite of their resistance the countrymen in their fury rushed the house and massacred bridegroom, bride, their friends and the soldiers, as well as the Company of the Scotch Captain which was quartered five miles off. The countrymen are now some thousands strong and are making for the neighbourhood of Brussels.

27. English Soldiers kidnap an Abbot
                                Antwerp
                                March 28, 1579.
    On the twenty-fifth of this month the English dragged the Abbot of St. Michael’s here by force to the waterside, as he was coming from the Council and riding back to the monastery. Three ships were lying there with about three hundred of their comrades. When His Serene Highness heard of this he informed the Prince of Orange at once and demanded the liberation of the Abbot. The Prince went at once with his bodyguard to the waterside and ordered them to let the Abbot go. The soldiers refused. The Prince called up three or four warships stationed in the river off the town together with their Admiral, and let the soldiers know that he meant to have two or three falconets fetched from the Arsenal to bombard their ships if they did not set the Abbot free. So the English set him free without doing him any injury. In excuse they alleged that they had only taken him on to their ships because, during the fortnight which they had spent without cessation on board, they had been given nothing but butter, cheese, and bad beer. They wanted the Abbot to try their rations and out of compassion give them something better. After the Abbot was liberated he drove in the Prince’s coach back to the monastery and is somewhat indisposed from the shock.

28. The Austrian Court despairs of Peace
                                Prague
                                June 25, 1579.
    Here at Court hopes of peace in the Netherlands are very slender, particularly because conditions at Maestricht and other towns are so dangerous and grow so menacing with the spread of religious discord. They declare here that the marriage between the Duke of Alençon and the elderly Queen of England will be carried through.
footnote: Francis of France, Duke of Alençon, brother of Charles IX, 1554-1584, was head of the Catholic party in France, became, with Elizabeth’s support, Duke of Brabant, but had finally to give up the struggle against the Spaniards.

28. The Alençon Marriage
                                Antwerp
                                July 25, 1579.
    In London letters of the 19th of this month it is reported that the Queen was taking a trip on the water with the Envoy of the Duke of Alençon, and that a shot was fired at the vessel as it passed. Whether it was intended for the Queen or the Envoy he can best tell who fired it and who has been arrested.

29. Portuguese Fears of Spain
                                Cologne
                                July 31, 1579.
    The Portuguese here have received letters from Portugal of the last day of June and the eighth of July to the effect that their King is very weak and that great scarcity of grain prevails in their country. Many also have died of plague. A great discussion has resulted among the Portuguese about this, since they do not wish to fall under Spanish dominion. The King has got rid of the Duke of Braganza and Don Antonio out of Lisbon by sending one of them to the Spanish frontier, the other to the opposite frontier. Don Antonio is said to have protested. However, he was obliged to leave Lisbon.
        footnote: King Sebastian of Portugal fell in the battle of Alcazar in 1578. He was succeeded by Cardinal Henry, who reigned till 1580. Don Antonio, Prior of Crato, 1531-1595, was the natural son of John II of Portugal and a Jewess. He took part in the unsuccessful expedition to Africa, then returned to Portugal to assert his rights to the throne. With too small an army he fought against Alva without success, but kept up the struggle for the throne for a long while with French and English assistance. He died in great poverty.
    footnote: John, Duke of Braganza, 1547-1583.

29-30. Spaniards in Ireland
                                Antwerp
                                August 8, 1579.
    The affair of the Spanish invasion of Ireland is said not to be so serious as was recently stated. Apparently only three ships with seven hundred men have landed in Ireland, wild reckless folk under a leader who is a rebel out of Ireland. The Queen at once sent five well-equipped ships to the place, so there will not be any trouble.
footnote: Nicholas Sanders, 1530-1581, a learned English Catholic. He studies at Rome and took an active part in the intrigues of English Catholics on the Continent against Elizabeth. He wrote a large number of uncompromisingly Catholic works, of which the best known is entitled De Visibili Monarchiâ Ecclesiae. He lived in France under the patronage of the Guises and then in Madrid with Philip II. The Papal Nuncio at the Spanish Court persuaded Philip to attempt a landing in Ireland, and Sanders was selected as Papal Envoy to Ireland. He was instructed to fight there in conjunction with James Fitzmaurice. In July 1579 he hoisted the Papal banner at Smerwick and the small Spanish force held out against the English troops there for nearly two years. He was joined by the Earl of Desmond. Sanders died finally a fugitive from the English soldiers.
James Fitgerald Fitzmaurice, known as the Archtraitor, d. 1579, second son of Maurice Fitzjohn. He aimed at the creation of a strong party in Ireland hostile to the English. He was the prime mover in the great Irish rebellion which broke out in 1570. In 1573 he submitted to the English, fled in 1575 to Paris and the following year went to Spain. He left his sons Maurice and Gerald behind in Madrid under the care of Granvella, and sailed to Ireland in 1579 with Sanders and Mattheo de Oviedo, arriving there in July. Soon after he fell in a battle against the English.

30. Spaniards in Ireland
                                Antwerp
                                August 22, 1579.
    The latest letters from England confirm the statement that the invaders of savage Ireland have already captured three fortresses and slaughtered the garrisons. The longer the invasion lasts the wider it spreads. Moreover, as the country is situated not far from Spain, perhaps that King will take more interest in it and give up his enterprise against Algiers. The Queen at first sent five ships there, and now another four. Also from the City of London and other towns she has despatched several hundred men. It is reported too that a bishop and some monks from Spain have arrived in Ireland, to convert the people. Many Irish are said to have joined them already.
    Yet another report has it that the Duke of Alençon has taken ship for England, and that the Queen has gone some distance from London to meet him. We must await the issue of the negotiations.

30-32. The Swedes attack and plunder Narva
                                Danzig
                                August 28, 1579.
    Yesterday an English captain came from Narva. He left his ship in the roadstead, came himself on shore for only a few hours, and then quickly went on board again to sail back to England. He relates that on the twenty-eighth of July the King of Sweden with twenty-three well-equipped ships arrived off Narva. The inhabitants were fairly delighted at this for they thought they were English, French, and Netherlandish merchantmen to whom they could sell their wares at a good profit. So part of the people ran from the town to the water’s edge to see who they were and when they would land. Some took boats to row aboard the ships. But when they got there the crews stabbed them and threw them into the water. Then a strong detachment landed. When the inhabitants saw that these were enemies they were terrified and ran towards the town with the Swedes after them. The Swedes then rushed and captured the German portion of Narva and slaughtered most of the inhabitants, although they had been ordered to spare the women and children. Then they crossed the water and took the Russian part of Narva also, except the castle which was within the town. As they had no time to loot, they set the place on fire and returned to German Narva which they cleared out completely. Their booty, amounting to several tons of gold, they quickly got on board. The King of Sweden’s Admiral in command summoned the English, French, and Low Countries merchants in Narva and reproached them with having supported the enemies of his King and master. They answered that they were merchants seeking their livelihood, and also that they had permits from the King of Sweden. When the Admiral saw these he said they were no use. He told them further that the goods they had already on board the ships lying in the river could remain their property, but anything in the town was forfeited. And he carried it all off to the great hurt of the Lübeckers. He said too that they must at once declare whether they wished to remain Russian, for if so they must go away at once. but if they were ready to serve his master the King of Sweden, then they could stay. To this they answered that they had come not to serve either the one master or the other but to seek their livelihood. However, when they saw that the Admiral was not satisfied with this, they declared that they would much rather serve the King of Sweden than the Muscovite. Upon this he at once put them into his army, so that they had to serve in the war against their will. Then he looted the town completely and set it on fire. The Englishman above mentioned had to help to set light to it. The town was burnt right down except for one house. The Englishman states that he got away at great risk to his life. He says the King of Sweden has taken so much booty that it will enable him to carry on war against the Muscovite for quite a long time.

32. Alençon going to England
                            Antwerp
                            August 29, 1579.
    The arrival of the Duke of Alençon in England is certain, but about his negotiations nothing is yet known. The Queen has sent a naval and military force of ten thousand men to Ireland, and five large warships on which alone are said to be two thousand men. She says her object is to check highway robbery, but there may be something else behind.

32. Henry IV takes Fuenterrabia
                            Antwerp
                            September 15, 1579.
    The latest letters from London of the fifth of this month state that the Duke of Anjou is expected in October with his entire retinue. The presumption is that something is afoot against Spain, for this very evening we learn during business hours from Lyons and Paris correspondents that the King of Navarre has surprised Fuenterrabia, a fortified town on the Spanish frontier, and occupied it with eight hundred musketeers.

32-33. Press Censorship
                            London
                            September 19, 1579.
    The Duke of Alençon has come to Paris sure enough. As it is supposed that next month he will be back here again a pamphlet has been issued against his marriage plans. After a few copies had been sold the printer was arrested, but the author has not yet been found. Although at first the people vehemently objected to this marriage and spoke openly against it, they now seem to have become quieter and less eager. From Ireland there is no definite news, except that soldiers are moving over there daily. Ten days ago we were told that seven hundred Spaniards or others had come to the aid of the rebels, but this is still uncertain. The English Ambassador has passed from Portugal to Spain to pay his respects to the King and protest against his having sent seven hundred men to Ireland. It seems that he did not deny this, and said that he was urged by the Grand Inquisitor to do in the interest of his own religion what the Queen had done in that of hers. Otherwise all is quiet. The merchants cannot come to terms with the Hanse towns about the Hamburg trade, and will not get their privileges restored.
    footnote: See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 19, Censorship.

33. French Sympathy with Henry IV
                            Cologne
                            September 26, 1579.
    The news about Fuenterrabia seems to be true, as the Duke of Terra Nova told Aerschote of it himself. The officer commanding the fortress appears to have fallen under the suspicion of the King of Spain because of the death of Escobedo, and so to have surrendered the place. It is thought here that the Spaniards will leave the Netherlands because they are finding enough to do at home, particularly it seems because the league between France, England and Portugal is making progress, and the Queen of England is fitting out forty ships. The Duke of Alençon is alleged to have promised to come to the assistance of the Portuguese if they should be threatened with war by the King of Spain. His brother, the King of France, is said, however, to be very ill, and if he were to die the Duke would not be able to leave the country easily. Nevertheless, he means to send the help promised and give aid to his brother-in-law, the King of Navarre, as well.
    Fuenterrabia, a village in the Spanish Province of San Sebastian close to Irun.
    Duke Charles of Aragon became Duke of Terra Nova in 1561, Prince of Castell-Vetrano in 1565, and Governor of Milan and Envoy to Germany on behalf of Philip II.

34. Dover Castle ready to receive Alençon
                            Antwerp
                            September 29, 1579.
    Again, I have no information about our military affairs. It is supposed in London that the Queen’s marriage is certain to take place. Dover Castle is being splendidly decorated for the purpose. It is however also asserted that the King of Spain is coming to England. But he is said to be making great naval preparations, and, though the ostensible object if Algiers, he is thought here to have designs on Portugal and England too.

34. A Setback for the Spaniards in Ireland
                            Antwerp
                            October 27, 1579.
    London letters of the tenth of this month announce that Parliament has been prorogued till February. Of the Queen’s marriage there is no more mention, but the news is confirmed that the Spaniards and the Irish rebels who joined them were surrounded in a wood by the Queen’s soldiers and the wood burnt down, Spaniards, rebels and all.

34. English Weather
                            Antwerp
                            November 1, 1579.
    We hear from England that there is fearful rough weather there with rain, heavy snow and unusual cold, such as has not been experienced for sixty years. In Ireland the English want not only to destroy the rebels and invading Spaniards utterly, but to drive out the Irish altogether, so as to take the country for themselves. Their warships are still there. Parliament remains prorogued till February and there is no further mention of the marriage.

34-35. Press Censorship again
                            Antwerp
                            November 22, 1579.
    Our English correspondent says the marriage plans of this Queen with the Duke of Alençon are going on. Parliament is to meet on the last day of this month. The Queen has cut off the hands of a nobleman and of another person of distinction who wrote and published a pamphlet. In the pamphlet it was stated that the Duke of Alençon was an enemy. Many of the nobility are upset at this punishment and have withdrawn from Court, so that it looks as though even in this country there might be a rising.
    footnote: John Stubbs or Stubbes was a very zealous Puritan who in 1579 published a protest against the project of a marriage between the Queen and the Duke of Alençon. He, his publisher Page, and his printer Singleton were condemned to have their right hands cut off, and the sentence on Page and Stubbes was carried out on November 3, 1579. When it was over, Stubbes waved his cap and shouted, “God save the Queen!”

35. The Portuguese Succession, the Princess of Eboli, Antonio Perez
                            Madrid
                            December 11, 1579.
    Secretary Antonio Perez has recovered from his illness and is said to be in good health. So far he has not again been deprived of his lodgings and many take this for a good sign. The Princess of Eboli continues still under arrest. About her, the Duke of Alva and his Secretary who is still in prison, silence remains unbroken. What the King will end by doing to them we shall see some day. At present no reliable information comes from Lisbon about what has happened over the election of a Prince, but it must come soon. Every one here declares that our King is to go to Seville next summer. If there is anything in this it is due to the Portuguese succession alone. Your Worship will hear about it in good time.

35-36. Death of the King of Portugal. Don Antonio and the King of Spain
                            Lisbon
                            February 3, 1580.
    On the thirty-first day of last month God the Lord called to himself from out of this vale of tears our Gracious King Don Henrico. At first this mournful occurrence caused no small panic among the common people, but mercifully there has been no disorder hitherto. God grant that peace may continue. Yesterday Don Antonio was here, but he appeared merely because he wants to be elected King. However, he met with little favour and went on at once to Almeria where most of his supporters are. It is to be feared that he will drag many a worthy man down with him to destruction. We shall soon hear whether the King of Spain is going to try to make himself King of Portugal by force. Up to now no news has come through, not even about what he is after with the army stationed around Seville. If he means to take the throne here he will give the Portuguese no time to get reinforcements or support from the French. There is so much talk that one does not know what to believe. Two envoys are said to be going to the King of Spain to try and get him to swear to recognize the man elected by the Cortes. But, as the King of Spain has hitherto not renounced his own claim, I expect he will not take the oath. He is sure to be unwilling to bear the heavy expense for his army to no purpose. The Portuguese, however, refuse point-blank to become Spanish, though I should like to know what they are going to do about resisting. They have not a single soldier in Portugal who has ever seen any fighting or would know how to lead properly. They have no arms for they lost them all in the African war. They have no money and there is fearful scarcity in the country. Moreover the plague is raging everywhere. Yet, with empty hands, they think themselves strong enough for the Spaniards.

36. Rather Turks than Spaniards
                            Antwerp
                            February 13, 1580.
    Some of the ships expected from Portugal have arrived and this is the news they bring. The Viceroy at Calicut in Portuguese India writes to Lisbon and other towns that they would rather have a revolution and would submit to Turkish rule more readily than to Castilian. So risings have taken place in three ports, which have declared for Don Antonio who is in exile.

37. Military Preparations in England
                            Antwerp
                            February 20, 1580.
    We hear from England that this Queen distrusts the Spanish fleet. She is having sixteen ships fitted out and six thousand men recruited in London. She has ordered also all men in the country to take up arms and make ready in case of need. Sixty thousand men are believed to be under arms already. In March Parliament is to meet, and all nobles who support the Crown are to be present, to consider negotiations about the marriage of the Duke of Alençon. But whether this meets the wishes of many English remains doubtful.

37. The Spanish Fleet, what is its Destination?
                            Antwerp
                            February 20, 1580.
    It is stated here that His Majesty of Spain has embarked six thousand pikemen for Biscay and that the great fleet is almost ready to sail. But where it is to make for is still unknown. The Queen of England, who perhaps has some information, has commandeered all ships in the country small and large and is fitting out all her warships in the utmost haste. Likewise she is calling up the whole population, so that she is supposed already to have collected eighty thousand foot and four thousand horse. Of these she is to send a portion to Ireland and she will also garrison the ports. Our presumption is that all Spanish naval preparations are intended for the Netherlands.
    A caravel from New Spain has reached Seville with six hundred arobas of cochineal on board. Another is to follow with a similar cargo. The Indian fleet is said to be bringing eight thousand arobas which will amount to a large sum of money.

37-38. Spain will get Portugal
                            Lisbon
                            February 26, 1580.
    To all appearances we shall not get off in this kingdom without some disorder, for I am credibly informed that Don Antonio is plotting in all directions. However, the struggle cannot last long, for all the best people here are in favour of Spain but dare not let it be seen. But when the King of Spain appears here with his army he will be better received than he expects. And he will rather surrender Flanders than this country. The ordinary man will not take this into account, moreover he believes that one Portuguese is worth ten Spaniards. I fancy the authorities set up in this country have an understanding with the Spaniards. I have no doubt that Spain will take possession of Portugal, as is fitting. I hope that then there will be better government and better business.

38. Alençon may be accepted by the Low Countries as Governor
                            London
                            March 5, 1580.
    It is still strongly rumoured that negotiations are being carried on about the marriage of our Queen with the Duke of Alençon, though representatives appointed by both sides. They say that, on conditions already settled, the Low Countries are ready to accept the above-mentioned Duke as ruler.
    Warships and an army as well have been made ready here against the Spanish fleet, but a few days ago they were dispersed, as it has been discovered that the Spanish fleet is only intended to make the King of Spain master of Portugal. The galleys and big ships of the Spaniards are no good for this country and even less for the Netherlands. The Spanish fleet still lies in various ports along the Straits of Gibraltar, and is in great confusion. There is also much mortality among the crews.

38-39. More Portuguese Bluster
                            London
                            March 5, 1580.
                            background: (Original in Italian.)
    Of the Spanish Armada we learn that the ships which came in on the first of February brought little cargo and that the fleet is still lying in various ports near the Straits of Gibraltar. A ship from Lisbon, which put in here in February, reports that the old King is really dead and that the King of Spain is spoken of as his successor, though he has not yet been proclaimed. The Portuguese Ambassador is still at this Court, and it is not thought that the King of Spain will be so readily accepted. He will meet with resistance and fears the strength of the fortresses in Portugal, Africa, Barbary, and at Calicut in Portuguese India. The Viceroy and the officers in high command declare that they would rather hand over their country to the enemies of our religion than to the Spaniards. Neither ships nor men are being got ready here, except for three ships destined for Ireland.

39. More Preparations in England
                            Antwerp
                            March 6, 1580.
    It is said that in England one hundred and thirty thousand men have been raised and enrolled for six months. For the first three months the country bears the cost, for the next three the Queen. If the King of Spain does not attack England, the Queen has thus no expenses to meet. The Queen has fitted out altogether sixteen of her warships and thirty merchantmen and many small yachts as well. In this country also naval preparations are to be made, and those of North Holland are already under way.

39-40. Talk about Alençon may be merely political
                            London
                            March 19, 1580.
    About our matrimonial plans rumour varies. Last week some nobles of the Duke of Alençon’s retinue arrived here. But we hear of no decision and it is conjectured that the whole marriage discussion has merely taken place because of the war in the Netherlands. Paris letters report that the citizens of La Rochelle have captured a Spanish ship bound for the Netherlands. The Spanish Ambassador has applied to the King for its release. In the ship were a hundred thousand Spanish double crowns, and all sorts of valuable merchandise. But the King has detained this ship on behalf of his brother the Duke of Alençon, so as to send the money to the insurgents in Flanders.
    We hear from Portugal that the decision about the succession was entrusted to the Pope, to His Majesty the Emperor, and to other Christian potentates. The Spaniards are successful in the war, but the war guilt must be laid to the account of the King of Spain.

40-41. La Rochelle takes some Spanish Gold
                            London
                            March 26, 1580.
    Nothing has yet been heard here of the Lisbon ships. But a ship has come in from San Lucar bringing letters of the fourth and fifth of this month to the effect that the fleet and likewise the army are arming and gathering about Cadiz. The Duke of Alva is in command, and it is believed that Portugal is the object. However, as the Portuguese are arming too and refuse so far to recognize the King of Spain, it is probable that the Spaniards will still hesitate to use force.
    Recruiting is to be recommenced in this country, no doubt to show the Spaniards that the Portuguese will not lack support.
    The same letters from San Lucar report that some ships from La Rochelle have captured the despatch caravel of the Indian fleet with some three hundred thousand ducats worth of gold, silver and pearls. Whether she comes from Peru or America is unknown. La Rochelle letters of the eighth of this month report that this ship came in with two others laden with sugar and other things. No decision can yet be got from the King as to whether these ships are to be regarded as prizes or not, so they are lying off the outside of the harbour and are still being treated as friends. But as the Spaniards in Florida have put Frenchmen to a miserable death, they will no doubt now have to pay for it. Our marriage is going backwards rather than forwards. Four more armed ships are to sally forth to deter the Spaniards from attacking Portugal. A Portuguese envoy is here and is on bad terms with the Spaniards, and it is thought that they are striving for war, in order to annex Portugal.

41. An Earthquake
                            Antwerp
                            April 16, 1580.
    The earthquake felt here, at Bruges in Flanders and also in Zeeland, was experienced on the same day in London in England as well as in France. Some towers and houses collapsed.

41. Don Antonio’s Prospects are poor
                            Lisbon
                            April 23, 1580.
    If  Almighty God averts it not we shall not escape without blows over the succession here. Don Antonio is surrounded by many worthless desperadoes of all nationalities, German, French, English, and is secretly hard at work recruiting abroad to bring foreign soldiers into this country. I have yet to hear that he has any adherents to speak of here among those of intelligence and position. A month ago the King of Spain wrote to Don Antonio and the Governor. He gave them twenty days to make up their minds. An envoy from the King of Spain has come over here to hear the answer but has not yet been received. A few days ago a servant of Don Antonio treacherously knocked down in the street Don Fernando de Pina, one of the most distinguished people here and a good Spaniard. If his escort had not protected him he would have been killed. Although the criminal fled to a monastery he was dragged out and imprisoned. The King of Spain is getting nearer and nearer to Portugal, and is said to have reached the last frontier town.

41-42. Civil War in France
                            Antwerp
                            30 April 1580.
    London letters of the twenty-third inform us that open war has broken out in France between the King and the Huguenots. Monsieur Valcour, member of the Council of War of Prince Condé, is said to have arrived in London to ask help from the Queen. Monsieur de Gitri has been sent by this Condé to John Casimir, to get him to prepare for a campaign in France. All those of the religion in Picrdy are joining Condé. He already has with him some hundred horse and a strong body of infantry. It is reported that the Duke of Alençon is mortally ill or even dead, and that he was poisoned. At Malines the soldiery has behaved very badly, and the town has had to promise the English troops fifty thousand florins to leave the place. Our city is making itself responsible for this amount, and important citizens of Malines have come here to give themselves as surety.

42. Malines and its English Garrison
                            Antwerp
                            May 7, 1580.
    They write from London in England on the last day of April that the Duke of Alençon’s envoy has arrived there and a second one is due. It is supposed that the marriage will come off after all. Alençon, too, is said to be less ill. He appears to have overheated himself playing tennis.
    Yesterday the English soldiers left Malines and were replaced by four hundred citizens from this place to protect the town. Besides them, there are in the place three companies of Scotch and other troops as well. When the English moved out of Malines, the inhabitants of the town fell upon them, wounded some and shot down others.

42. The Spaniards in Ireland again
                            Antwerp
                            May 14, 1580.
    Thirty Spanish warships with troops on board are stated to have appeared off Ireland. With the help of five of the Queen’s warships the country people seem to be offering determined resistance and to have sunk three of the largest Spanish ships. The remainder are surrounded, so that they cannot get to shore, and it is hoped that not one of the Spanish warships will get away till English reinforcements come into Ireland. The English are said to have captured all the fortresses in Ireland and almost the whole country and to have killed the fortress garrisons.

43. The Portuguese want help against Spain
                            Cologne
                            June 24, 1580.
    A Portuguese ambassador has come to Antwerp bearing despatches to the Prince of Orange and the Government. He is said to have brought with him letters of credit to a large amount to purchase and send to Portugal armour, powder and all sorts of other munitions of war. Subsequently he is to go to England as well, to do the same there too. His request to the Prince and government is being kept secret, but it is probable that he will ask for help in both quarters. The general opinion is, however, that the trouble between Portugal and Spain will end peaceably, more especially as in Portugal there is much scarcity and the mortality is heavy.

43. But the Spaniards are in Portugal already
                            Antwerp
                            August 13, 1580.
    A small boat that left Portugal on the twenty-sixth of July brings news from there that the Spaniards are already in the country, and that the Portuguese are done for, unless they get foreign help. But, according to London letters, news has reached there from Paris, that Philip Strozzi has gone to Portugal with four thousand French and it is supposed that England will also send some troops there. But it should be remembered that, with all this delay in sending aid, the King of Spain will be able to do what he likes with the Portuguese.
    footnote: Philip Strozzi, 1541-1582, Colonel-General of French infantry, led the French fleet against Spain on behalf of Don Antonio and fell in the sea-fight off the Azores on July 26, 1582.

43-44. The Papal Flag in the Irish Sea
                            Antwerp
                            October 8, 1580.
    They write from England that seven shiploads of troops have appeared off the Irish coast. Some say they are Spaniards, others that they are two thousand Italians sent by the Pope. They bear two keys on their flags sure enough. So the Queen of England has had her fortresses and ports garrisoned and forbidden sailings to Spain.

44. Energetic Measures for Defence in England
                            Cologne
                            October 13, 1580.
    In England six thousand foot and sixteen ships are being got ready for Ireland. The Queen has stopped all ships bound from England for Spain, Lisbon and other places, and is arming energetically against Ireland. Three thousand soldiers are assembled at Biscaya for daily shipment to Ireland. Smoke is now rising yonder that will choke many before it is damped down.

44. A False Alarm
                            Antwerp
                            October 15, 1580.
    The news from Ireland last reported was false. It was only a herring fleet. All the talk arose because it was taken for an enemy.
    footnote: See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 35, Ireland.

44. An English Envoy intercepted
                            Cologne
                            October 20, 1580.
    The people of Bleibuir have taken prisoner and placed in the castle there an English Envoy who had gone to Prague on his way from Antwerp to His Imperial Majesty.

44-45. The Return of Drake
                            Cologne
                            October 20, 1580.
    Our Antwerp correspondent assures us of the return of the English Captain Drake, who is a pirate and has been away for three years. In India, which belongs to the King of Spain, he has stolen two millions in cash, has passed through the Straits of Magellan and come back home. If this is true many pirates and adventurers will follow after him.
footnote: Sir Francis Drake, 1540-1596, the renowned English sailor and circumnavigator, made and expedition to Guinea with Hawkins in 1567, and in 1570-1571 embarked on what may be called experimental voyages for his big voyage in 1572 to the Spanish-American ports. He sailed round the world from 1577 to 1580, and was knighted by Elizabeth in 1581. In 1585 he led his fleet against the Spaniards and captured the Cape Verde islands, sailing on from there to San(to) Domingo and Florida. In 1586 he came home and in 1587 made his famous voyage to Spain. In 1588 he fought against the Armada, and was in command of the fleet in 1589 which was to help Don Antonio to gain his throne of Portugal. In 1595 he made a fresh voyage to the West Indies, but with less success than on former occasions. On this voyage he died off Portobello.

45-46. Inventory of Cargoes from India
unknown
unknown
Cargoes of four ships from Calicut in India which arrived at Lisbon in August—
    Pepper, all sorts 20,777 (in cwts.)
    Cloves  2,863
    Mace    343
    Nutmegs 444
    Cinnamon 248
    Ginger 203
    Ginger for preserving 600
    Tufted cloves 470
    Indigo 235
    Wax 235
    Resin 27
    Raw silk 87
    China silk 1.2
    Incense 3.2
    Amber 2,826 (arobas)
    Small pearls 1,696
17 ships from New Spain are bringing—
    for the King 600,000 (ducats)
    for merchants 1,100,000
    Hides 100,007
    Cochineal 6,000 (arobas)
    Cinnamon 407
The fleet from Peru and the Main is to bring—
    for the King 1,500,000 (ducats)
    for merchants 4,500,000

46. Elizabeth is not to be trifled with
                            Antwerp
                            November 12, 1580.
    On the report that four English ships have been confiscated in Spain the Queen of England has had four Spanish ships confiscated at Plymouth. It is believed that Spain is holding up the ships because of Captain Drake, who arrived in London a few weeks ago with a quantity of bullion. A year ago he attacked the ships on their way from New Spain, and the King of Spain demands that he be sentenced.

46. She refuses to see Mendoza
                            Cologne
                            December 1, 1580.
    They write from England that the Queen has forbidden the Spanish Ambassador, Don Bernardino de Mendoza, to come to Court. The Queen is said to have sent an envoy to Spain for the purpose. Why this has happened is unknown.

46. Drake’s Gifts to the Queen
                            Antwerp
                            December 3, 1580.
    English letters of the twenty-sixth of last month say that the Spaniards and Italians in conjunction with the Irish rebels built a fort and hoped to get hold of some ships. But these latter were surrounded by the Queen’s forces, driven ashore and sunk. So there need be no more anxiety about them. Again the news from London is confirmed that Drake the English pirate has presented the Queen with several horses laden with silver and gold from the booty which he got two years ago off the Peru ships. This Drake is said to be again proposing to make a raid on the Peru ships and to try his luck afresh.

47. Spanish Prisoners from Ireland
                            Antwerp
                            December 24, 1580.
    Letters from London in England of the tenth of this month not only confirm the defeat of Don Antonio but also report his imprisonment. He has been taken to Valladolid. As concerns the Irish war it is correct that of the Spanish and Italian invaders five thousand have been slain. On the twenty-fifth and twenty-eighth they were brought to London as prisoners, among them a few officers. But these were liberated for a small ransom. At the castle of Smerwick seventeen prisoners were hanged. Earl Desmond, a rebel, came to reinforce the Spaniards and Italians with six thousand Irish, but arrived too late.
    The following are said to be among those brought to London:  Signor Sebastiano de San Josepho, General of the Italians, Alexander Mestre de Campo, a Spaniard, Don Antonio Ortage of Biscaya, Signor Stefano Palosimo, Conrado Pandolfo, Erdusso, Francesco Angelico, Alexandro Severo, Signor Fabian Lucas, and Josefo Fabian.

47. They are ransomed
                            Antwerp
                            January 1, 1581.
    The last letters from England report that the Queen has thrown the brother of the Duke of Norfolk and two of the nobility into prison for conspiring against her. The prisoners brought to London from Ireland have been liberated for a ransom of 20,000 crowns.
    footnote: Philip Howard, first Earl of Arundel, 1557-1595, eldest son of Thomas Howard, fourth Duke of Norfolk. He was implicated in the conspiracy of Campion the Jesuit against the Queen, and therefore fell under suspicion. In 1584 he turned Catholic, and in 1585, when attempting to flee the country, he was captured at sea and kept in the Tower for many years. In 1589 he was accused of high treason and practice of the Catholic religion in the Tower and condemned to death. He died in 1595, it is alleged by poison.

47-48. Defeat of Don Antonio confirmed
                            Cologne
                            January 20, 1581.
    The Italian letters tell such different tales that little that is reliable can be gleaned about Don Antonio. What the local Portuguese hear seems more like the truth. They are informed that he and his adherents, after being routed by the Spaniards near Oporto, embarked on an English ship at Vianna, in order to sail to France or England. But they could not do this owing to contrary winds, so they left the ship perforce and went to Galicia by land. They were overtaken and robbed by Spanish soldiers. The Spaniards made no mention of their death, fearing to be deprived of the loot. This news has lately reached the Portuguese from Antwerp and meets with universal credence. So there is little need to fear the reappearance of Don Antonio and the other rebels.

48-50. Turmoil in Scotland
                            Antwerp
                            January 21, 1581.
    There are said to be political disturbances developing in Scotland. The Queen of England has sent troops and £20,000 in cash to Lord Hunsdon, Governor on the Border, so that he may invade Scotland with a large force in favour of the young King. This force is directed against Aubigny, a Catholic and a Frenchman, though of Scotch origin. He has gained control of the person of the young King, and taken the Earl of Morton prisoner in bed, as he was sleeping above the bedchamber of the King. This was accomplished with the aid of certain Frenchmen. The Queen of England is very eager to have the Earl of Morton set free and to suppress the rising. The Queen has summoned Parliament to meet in London on the fourteenth of this month.
    footnote: James Douglas, fourth Earl of Morton, born 1530. He was Chancellor of Scotland and chief agent in the assassination of Rizzio. After the reconciliation of Mary Stuart with Darnley he was deprived of his office. In 1567 he returned to Scotland, and it is uncertain whether he had a share in the murder of Darnley. But in any case he promoted the marriage of Mary Stuart with Bothwell. On Oct. 24, 1573, he was chosen Regent of Scotland with the support of Elizabeth, so that English influence in the country became paramount. For alleged participation in Darnley’s murder he was condemned to death and beheaded at Edinburgh on July 2, 1581.
    Henry Howard, Earl of Northampton, younger brother of Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk. He was implicated in the conspiracy of Norfolk on behalf of Mary Stuart. After Norfolk’s execution he attempted to gain the favour of the Queen. He was repeatedly imprisoned for seditious writings, and was a zealous supporter of Essex. Under James I he was in great favour and became Warden of the Cinque Ports.
    Henry Carey, first Lord Hunsdon, 1524-1596, English diplomatist and soldier. By desire of Elizabeth he frequently intervened in Scotch affairs with success. In Scotland he was repeatedly entrusted with the most important and difficult negotiations, and was a member of Alençon’s suite on his journey to Antwerp.
    James VI, King of Scotland, as James I, King of Great Britain and Ireland, 1566-1625. He was a son of Mary Stuart and Lord Darnley. The life of this sovereign, especially in his early years, was influenced by the struggles between Catholicism and Protestantism, and the partisans of France, Spain and England.
    On July 29, 1567, he was crowned King at Stirling, and James Douglas, Earl of Morton, held the Regency. In 1570 the Earl of Lennox undertook the education of the child. In 1578 Morton was forced to abandon the Regency, but soon returned to power till 1579 when Esmé Stuart, nephew of Lennox, arrived in Scotland. Morton strove for the friendship of England, but Stuart was an emissary of the Guises. Stuart became Duke of Lennox, James Stewart, his creature, Earl of Arran. For alleged complicity in the murder of Darnley, Morton was executed in 1581. Between Lennox and James a serious conflict developed in 1582, and in the raid of Ruthven James was captured by the Earl of Gowrie. James became definitely opposed to Lennox and his favourite Arran. Lennox fled to Paris and soon afterwards died there. Arran lost his power and fled to St. Andrews, where he was supported by the enemies of Gowrie. James recalled Arran in 1583, and Gowrie and his confederates fled to England. In a letter to the pope in 1584 James announced that he meant to adhere to the Protestant religion, but asked for help for his imprisoned mother. In 1585 James received from Elizabeth the offer of an alliance with England and a yearly pension of £5000, and this he accepted, whereupon Arran fled. After the condemnation of Mary Stuart to death he asked for pardon in vain. In 1588 Huntly and Maxwell wished to take the Spanish side, but James remained true to Elizabeth. In 1589 he married Anne of Denmark. In 1591 a fresh struggle bro9ke out between him and a nephew of his mother’s third husband Francis Stuart, to whom he had granted the title of Earl of Bothwell. In 1592 disorder broke out in Scotland owing to a supposed alliance with Spain. In 1594 James fell out with Huntly, who left Scotland. In 1596 a revolt broke out in Edinburgh against the King, and he left the town and escaped to Linlithgow. In 1599 there appeared a letter to the Pope stated to be by James, asking for the promotion of a Scotch bishop to the Cardinalate. After Elizabeth’s death he left Edinburgh and made a Royal entry into London. His hostility to the Catholics caused the Gunpowder Plot, and his vacillating character rendered him unpopular with the nation. To his son, Charles I, this was fatal.

50. Don Antonio escapes from Portugal
                            Chimenes
                            January 24, 1581.
    To the Worshipful Lord Philip Fugger, Lord of Kirchberg and Weissenhorn, my gracious Cousin.
    Worshipful most Gracious and Well-loved Cousin!
    To my Lord may my most obedient and willing service and my best efforts be assured all the days of my life.
    I desire not to fail to report to my Cousin of affairs here in Portugal. Don Antonio has been living in want and in the clothing of a boor. With the aid of some Franciscan monks he has contrived to embark at Bayonne (Bayona) on a Venetian ship which was to have taken in cargo. But when he got on board the sails were at once hoisted and the ship put to sea and went they say to France. The merchants and cargo were left behind. Those who helped him each received a gift of seven thousand crowns. No sooner have we now peace from Don Antonio than our Lord God scourges us with the plague which is here deeply rooted. May the Almighty deign to avert this punishment.
    All the days of my life I am my Lord Cousin’s most obedient cousin.
                                       CHRISTOPHER THANNER.

50-51. Spanish Plots in Scotland
                            Cologne
                            February 2, 1581.
    They hear at Antwerp that the rising in Scotland has been brought about by Spain to prevent the Queen from helping the Low Countries. It is also stated that the King of Spain wants to arrange a marriage for the Queen of Scots when she is let out of prison. All this is baseless conjecture. It is announced too that six weeks ago Philip Strozzi had assembled four thousand French at Nantes and put them on board thirteen or fourteen ships, giving out that he was going to the aid of Don Antonio in Portugal. It is supposed that he has invaded Scotland with them, though no news has come in since his departure from Nantes. But, if he has sailed for Scotland, the Low Countries government will be suspicious of the Duke of Alençon. The Queen of England has summoned Parliament for January 20. It is said that Parliament is to select a ruler for the country and that the Queen is to make known who will ascend the throne after her death. The next letters will tell us more.

51. Demand for the Release of Mary Queen of Scots
                            Cologne
                            February 3, 1581.
    According to reports from Antwerp the Irish rising is far from being as completely quelled as the English say. Besides in Scotland a fresh collision has occurred between Catholics and Protestants. The Catholics demand that the English Queen should release the Queen of Scots from her long imprisonment and freely allow her return to her own country. The English declare that no one but the young King of Scotland shall ascend their throne. Thus considerable discord may arise between the two kingdoms. It is also reported that the Scotch have captured and beheaded their English Viceroy and that Strozzi and his troops have entered Scotland from France, in spite of his having said that he was taking them to Portugal.


51-52. Projected Alliance with France
                            Paris
                            March 3, 1581.
    The ambassadors for England are waiting here till the money and other articles they require can be collected. Monsieur Brisson, President of the Parliament, is to accompany them. The object of the mission, according to universal belief, is merely a renewal of the old alliance formed between the two crowns in 1572. Time will show whether there are to be any other negotiations. The other envoys to England are the old Monsieur de Lansar, Monsieur de la Mothe Fénelon with a Secretary sent by the King, and Monsieur de la Vigne with a Secretary sent by the Duke of Alençon.
    footnote: Bertrand de Salignac, Marquiws de la Mothe-Fénelon, d. 1599. Well-known French diplomatist, entrusted with the most important negotiations between France and England.
    Barnabas Brisson, 1531-1591, Advocate-General under Henry III, President of the Parliament of Paris 1580, sent to England about the marriage of the Duke of Alençon, author of the legal book known as the Code Henri III.

52. Projected Alliance with France
                            Antwerp
                            March 4, 1581.
    Letters from London of the twenty-fifth of last month state that the French embassy was very well received by this Queen. It is thought that it only came about the Duke of Alençon or perhaps to form an alliance against Spain.
    The Queen’s troops are already on the Scotch frontier, but it is hoped that the dispute between the Scotch and their captive Regent will be settled.

52. War Taxation
                            Antwerp
                            March 15, 1581.
    Letters from England of the 11th inst. say nothing of affairs in Scotland. Those savages in Ireland have got the aid of certain Scotch savages, and the Queen has taken the necessary measures. Parliament in London may be prorogued any moment. Numerous bills have been passed and taxes voted higher than for many a day.

52-53. Mutiny of Scotch Troops in the Low Countries
                            Antwerp
                            March 24, 1581.
    As the Scotch regiment stationed in the fortress of Villebroek has received no pay for eleven months it has mutinied, driven its officers away and made an arrangement with the enemy. Since it was impossible to pay the men at once they were arranging to hand the place over to the enemy for a sum of money. Because the whole of Brabant and the city of Brussels in particular was exposed to great danger by this, and the citizens of Brussels had not money enough to satisfy the Scotch, the Grand Council here voted a new tax last Sunday to wit 25 stuiber per barrel of wine and 4 stuiber per barrel of beer. Altogether the town raised 10,000 carlins in cash and with the tax already voted it will be possible to pay all the troops.


53. James of Scotland a Protestant
                            Paris
                            April 1, 1581.
    Our embassy for England is still at Calais waiting for a favourable wind and for the Dauphin, son of the Duc de Montpensier. He is to leave here in two or three days; and besides him other nobles and the Duc de Bouillon’s two young gentlemen are to go. So this embassy grows more distinguished.
    The English assert that the Scotch have set their captive Regent free again. The King of Scotland has proclaimed by edict that he will live and die in the Calvinist religion in which he has been brought up, and that he will not tolerate Catholicism; but the Scotch say otherwise.
    The English also declare that a plot has been formed by the Jesuits, Catholic nobles and other persons, whom the Queen has imprisoned. One important gentleman has fallen away, abjured the Roman faith and been set at liberty. The others are still in prison. In a word the English have a horror of the King of Spain and do not trust us here overmuch either.
footnote: François de Bourbon, Duc de Montpensier, 1539-1592, a very brave soldier who fought against the Huguenots and became Governor of Normandy. Till 1582 he was called the Count Dauphin.

53-54. The Scotch Troops still mutinous and still unpaid
                            Antwerp
                            April 15, 1581.
    The Scotch at Villebroek are still mutinying. They have an arrangement with the enemy at Louvain and Aelst. The day before yesterday emissaries were sent them with some money, but I fear they will not be content with so little. Negotiations are in progress to get them out of the fortress, but I gather to no purpose. They refuse to move unless they receive arrears in full, but this is impossible. Things have got so far that they want to cut through the canal from Brussels so as to surround the town on one side with water and block the way to Louvain. When the Scotch have gone, citizens from Antwerp and Brussels are to replace them in the fortress. Not more than two months pay is owing to the Scotch. Their Colonel Stewart and their Captains cannot come near them; they have been driven away. The English Colonel Norris, commanding in Friesland for the States General, is here now. He has been owed a good sum for a long time and is now demanding payment.
    footnote: Sir William Stewart lived during the period between 1575 and 1603. He was a soldier and diplomatist and held a command in the Netherlands. He intrigued with the Spaniards on behalf of Mary Stuart against James of Scotland.
    Sir Edward Norris, Governor of Ostend, had long been in command of the English troops in the Netherlands, d. 1603.

54. French Embassy in England
                            Cologne
                            April 27, 1581.
    Antwerp letters of the 22nd inst. say that the French embassy reached England 450 strong. It is conjectured that the marriage of the Duke of Alençon with the Queen is to be negotiated. The Queen’s preparations in England seem to be magnificent. Such a triumphal entry into England has never been seen. She has had a special house built for the banquet. The rooms in the Palace are said to be so covered with gold and silver hangings that every one is amazed. In Antwerp it is impossible to get gold and silver cloth enough. All that comes in is sent to England. What exactly will be the end of it God only knows. The Queen has forbidden on heavy penalties any mention of the decisions in Parliament. Many think that an alliance between Her Majesty and the Crown of France is to be concluded.

55-56. The Norfolk Conspirators
                            London
                            April 29, 1581
    Since amongst other things you ask for information about what has been done to the prisoners arrested four months ago, you should know that the brother of the last Duke of Norfolk and two knights are still in prison. This because they have again become reconciled to the Roman Church, having been led thereto by certain agents instigated for the purpose by the Pope. This is taken very ill in the country. There is a suspicion too that they have been plotting against the crown and realm of England. But, as hitherto nothing has been brought home to them, they remain in prison, simply because they are in bad odour. The Earl of Oxford, also arrested but soon set at liberty, is again in the Tower for forgetting himself with one of the Queen’s Maids of Honour, who is in the Tower likewise. This in spite of his having a pretty wife, daughter of the Treasurer. But he will not live with her.
    In Scotland Aubigny, a French gentleman of Royal blood and cousin of the young King, has usurped the government and thrown the old Regent, Earl Morton, into prison. On the pretext that the Regent caused the death of the King’s father, he is trying to draw the people to himself. All Earl Morton’s clan, the Douglas’, have revolted against him, and called in English aid.
    More about the French Embassy
    Some distinguished representatives of France, many nobles and some legal experts are here. What they are after is not yet clearly proven. The French give out that they are negotiating the marriage of the Queen with the Duke of Alençon. Others declare that they are here to effect a firm alliance between the French crown and the Low Countries to be under the direction of the Duke of Alençon. This would concern England too, as it could only be accomplished with the previous knowledge, good will and permission of the Queen. She has promised to lend the French £200,000 if they give her the town of Calais so that she may make use of it in the Low Countries War. The French are also to swear to preserve this alliance between the Queen and the Low Countries.
    It is thought too that something could be arranged against the King of Spain to help Don Antonio who is living at Mazagan in Barbary. Don Antonio has despatched an envoy, a Count, in priest’s clothes to the French Court. He is to prepare ships to bring back Don Antonio. On the 1st inst. the Azores were still holding firm for Don Antonio and rumour went that these islands and the Calicut district of India could be captured if help were brought them betimes. So war must be looked for there also. In our parliament no decision has yet been reached. Only some Portuguese business has been set in order.
    footnote: Thomas Howard, fourth Duke of Norfolk, son of the executed Earl of Surrey, 1536-1572. Under Elizabeth he pretended to be an adherent of the Established Church, but worked in the interests of the Catholic party, hoping to become the husband of Mary Stuart. Cecil, however, discovered his project and had him imprisoned. When released he continued his intrigues, was convicted of being in league with Philip II, imprisoned afresh and beheaded on June 2, 1572.
    Archibald Douglas, eighth Earl of Angus, 1525-1588. He took part in a rising against James VI in 1584, was pardoned in 1585, and in 1587 received the title of Earl of Morton.
    Edward de Vere, seventeenth Earl of Oxford, 1550-1604, played an important part as Elizabeth’s Court when quite a youth. He was a relation of the Norfolks, had large estates, was very eccentric, and was arrested because of a duel in 1581. He fell into great money difficulties, was a very gifted poet and musician, and married as his first wife Anne, eldest daughter of Cecil, Lord Burleigh.

56-57. A younger English Bride to be found for Alençon
                            Antwerp
                            April 29, 1581.
    Letters from England of April 22 announce the arrival in London on April 21 of the French Embassy to the Queen. It was received in audience the very next day. We are told that the Queen had with her a young lady who was called by every one her cousin and next heiress to the English throne after the Queen’s death. But now it is said to be evident that she is a daughter of the Queen whom she had by N.N. So a marriage is to be arranged between this young lady and the Duke of Alençon. this cannot long be kept secret.
    footnote: Presumably Arabela Stuart. See note on 151.

57. Is Elizabeth in earnest?
                            Antwerp
                            May 6, 1581.
    London letters of April 29 are to hand and the only mention made of the suit of the French embassy is that some still believe in a marriage between the Duke of Alençon and the Queen, but that others doubt it. Some declare that the French offer to cede the town and port of Calais on condition of the Queen advancing £200,000, now equal to a million ordinary thalers. This would facilitate the execution of French projects against the malcontents. We shall soon know whether, as some conjecture, the Queen intends to conclude an alliance with France and the Low Countries against Spain.

57. Anxiety about Alençon
                            Cologne
                            June 1, 1581.
    News reaches Antwerp from England that for a whole week nothing has taken place in London but banqueting and jousting and that certain French gentlemen have returned home. It looks as though the Queen even now wanted time for reflection, and the long absence of the Duke of Alençon causes her much anxiety. The belief is that he will betray the Low Countries and come to an understanding with Spain. It appears too that some people in Antwerp are beginning to be afraid of him for they do not talk nearly so big as before.

57-58. A Hostage kidnapped
                            London
                            June 10, 1581.
    Yesterday one of the secretaries of the Prince of Orange came here. By instruction of this Prince on the 5th inst. at eight o’clock, outside the lodgings of the Spanish ambassador and in presence of the ambassador’s servants and with the assistance of a halberdier, he took away a boy of eleven. This boy was the son of a Dutch sea captain and with the knowledge of the Prince of Orange had been delivered to the Spanish ambassador as a hostage. On the 5th inst. the captain was to have handed the town of Flushing over to the Spaniards and malcontents. But the intention merely was to draw the malcontents into a trap, so all preparations had been made in Flushing. The Spanish ambassador had paid over to the captain 5000 crowns in advance. The malcontents had been warned in time. It is doubtful whether the Duke of Alençon has been here lately. Nevertheless many negotiations have been carried on this week and the French seem to be satisfied. But what will come of it is still a mystery. The Duc de Bouillon and his brother left here three days ago, the other Frenchmen are to follow them to-morrow.

58. The French leave, laden with Gifts and Promises
                            London
                            June 17, 1581.
    The French envoys have left well satisfied and laden with gifts. It seems that the marriage has been determined on, but that the Queen wants a little more time for reflection. The alliance appears to be concluded and the Duke of Alençon is perhaps more set upon it so as to be able to carry through his plans in the Low Countries, and thus to be honoured by his brother, feared by the Spaniards, and proportionately loved by the Netherlanders. The envoy of the Duke of Alençon still remains here. Captain Drake is beginning preparations and is also fitting out some of the Queen’s ships for a voyage to India. The Azores are being provided with all necessaries from here. It is said that some Portuguese nobles have arrived.

58-59. The French leave, laden with Gifts and Promises
                            Paris
                            June 14, 1581.
    Our embassy has returned from England, only La Mothe Fénelon and an envoy of the Duke of Alençon remaining behind. As to results all that is said is that much money has been spent and the alliance renewed on unfavourable conditions. The Queen did not show them much confidence but was busily negotiating on the other hand with the King of Spain.

59. Don Antonio in London, Alençon to go to the Low Countries
                        London
                        July 15, 1581.
    Don Antonio of Portugal is still here. He sometimes goes to Court and receives visits from the Court. This week a ship came in here from the Azores and reported that those islands still adhere to Don Antonio. Six thousand men are gathered on the islands and 400 French are expected there. From France it is announced that the Duke of Alençon is arming heavily. He is said to have arranged with his brother in Paris who is lending his aid. Many Huguenot gentlemen are to go to the Low Countries with Alençon. They also learn that the nobles in Normandy are riding to support Alençon. This week at Court here a violent quarrel broke out between the Earl of Cecil the Grand Chamberlain and the Earl of Leicester over a question of precedence. The Queen has commanded both to remain within their houses and is striving to make peace.
    footnote: William Cecil, Lord Burleigh, 1520-1598, the well-known English statesman and confidential adviser of Elizabeth.

59-60. Drake laying in Stores
                            Cologne
                            July 20, 1581.
    From Antwerp a quantity of munitions of war is being taken over to England and bought there. They say that within a few days over 300,000 feet of fuse was sent there, also that besides the ten first ships yet another ten are to be equipped. With these the pirate Drake is to sail to India to loot. It is stated too that some ships have arrived off the Azores from Brazil to take in water, and they have been held up there. This is Antwerp news; if there should be anything in it we shall soon learn from Lisbon and Spain. On the 13th inst. letters came to Antwerp from England with tidings that nothing yet is known for certain about Don Antonio.

60. Don Antonio’s Plans
                        Antwerp
                        July 29, 1581.
    The latest English letters from London dated 22nd report that Don Antonio is buying a lot of fine ships to form a fleet to send to the Azores. The Queen of England is said to have given Don Antonio the port of Southampton and to have garrisoned it with troops. On the 23rd inst. Secretary Walsingham was due to go to France, to convey the Queen’s answer to the questions submitted to her for consideration six weeks ago. They say a definitive alliance will be concluded.

60. Don Antonio’s Plans
                        London
                        July 29, 1581.
    Every day many Portuguese notables come to Don Antonio here. He has with him now over thirty nobles of the best families. This week 50,000 crowns were brought to him by a Portuguese from France. It looks as though he were having some ships fitted out in France, to be used both here and for the voyage to the two Indies. They say he is having fifty ships equipped here. Don Antonio lives in a palace and it seems as though he would stay here for a long while yet.

60-61. Spain alarmed about Alençon
                            Antwerp
                            August 12, 1581.
    The ambassador of the King of Spain who has been at the French Court for some time has been incessantly begging the King to put an end to the projects of his brother the Duke of Alençon in the Low Countries. At the same time he has seriously threatened war between Spain and France if this should not be done. The King of France is said to have made answer a few days since, that he could not change his brother’s plans, that his nobles were standing in with Alençon, and that if the King of Spain wanted to make war with France over this he could not help it.
    In London letters of the 5th inst. news dated July 11 and 12 comes from the Azores that a Spanish captain has landed on Santa Maria, one of the islands which adheres to the King of Spain. The other islands support Don Antonio.
    It is reported from England that Don Antonio is raising troops, and that some of his warships have already sailed for the Azores.
    footnote: Santa Maria is an island in the Azores group.

61. Walsingham in Paris
                            Paris
                            August 15, 1581.
    An English Envoy Extraordinary named Walsingham has arrived here. He has requested free passage from the King and has gone on at once to the Duke of Alençon.

61. Don Antonio an instrument of the Queen
                            Paris
                            August 19, 1581.
    The French ambassador writes from England that this Queen has quite certainly laid hold upon Don Antonio and his ships too. The English here at Court do not indeed deny this but will not be frank about it.

61. The French in the Azores
                            Cologne
                            August 24, 1581.
    They write from Antwerp that the Azores people, with the help of some French ships, have taken a galleon and five ships from the King of Spain. The fleet of thirty-nine ships fitting out in England is to start at the earliest possible moment. The fleets from New Spain and from Calicut in India will be in the utmost danger. May the Almighty escort both safe home. In letters of the 16th inst. we hear from Antwerp that sailings from England to Spain and Portugal are forbidden. What will happen in Spain over this we shall hear some day.

62. Defeat of the Spaniards confirmed
                            Antwerp
                            September 2, 1581.
    London letters of the 26th of last month confirm the defeat of the Spaniards in the Azores. It is also stated that Don Antonio is fitting out some ships which have not yet started owing to contrary winds. But others declare that the captains could not agree with one another because some wanted the Englishman Drake to command, while others fear his strictness and want somebody else for Admiral. However, it is also maintained that this fleet is still awaiting reinforcements from France.

62. Don Antonio detained by the Queen
                            Frankfort
                            September 17, 1581.
    It is reported from England that Don Antonio’s fleet is not starting because there is no money in hand. The Queen of England is said to be selling the provisions which she had caused to be delivered on board. They say there is much jealousy between England and France and neither trusts the other. The treaty provides that France shall equip thirty ships, but we hear that not a single one has yet been fitted out. So the Queen of England sees that France does not keep faith and thus she loses confidence. It is also said here that His Majesty of Spain has captured the Azores. If this should be true it would be a very good thing for Portuguese sea trade.

62-63. At last he puts to Sea
                            Cologne
                            October 15, 1581.
    They announce from Antwerp that Don Antonio has left England for La Rochelle. Some townsmen here who have received English letters of the 23rd September declare that Don Antonio’s fleet has put to sea for a destination unknown. His Majesty of Spain is said to be arming heavily, and to have twenty-eight ships at Cadiz and San Lucar ready to send to the Straits of Megellan. His Majesty is probably going to oppose the English captain Drake with these. Nothing is heard of the fleet from New Spain and it is not known where it can have been for so long.

63. Alençon again in England
                            London, November 18, 1581.
    The Duke of Alençon is still here, and appeared yesterday standing at the window by the Queen’s side. He has been attending a tourney held in honour of this Queen because twenty-three years ago yesterday she ascended the throne and has reigned happily hitherto. About the negotiations of Alençon there is nothing definite to report. His Secretary is expected here from France.
    Alençon is said to have despatched some of his officers from here to lead his troops from Artois into the Low Countries.
    footnote: See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 46, Alençon.

63. What does Elizabeth mean to do?
                            Antwerp
                            December 5, 1581.
    It is recently reported what tourneys and diversions have been provided in London in honour of the Duke of Alençon. News of his marriage has also reached here, in joy whereover the big bell was rung and the big gun fired. On November 29 bonfires were lighted too. But all this might as well have been omitted, and I am almost ashamed to mention this childishness, all the more as the last London letters are very cool about the marriage. It appears that negotiations are still hitching at certain points. They write that on the 5th, that is to-day, Parliament is to meet in London. Many hope for the match, for then the Duke of Alençon will become absolute master of the Low Countries. The Count of Emden, who has been in England and is to be Governor of Friesland, is said to be raising troops at Deventer in the name of the Queen of England.
    footnote: Edzardus II, Count of Emden, 1532-1599.

64-66. The French Marriage unpopular in England, but Alençon is living in the Queen’s Palace, though all is uncertain. Hanging of Jesuits in England
unknown
unknown
background: Verbal report of a traveller from England (undated).
    On December 10, I left England by London and on the 15th inst., thank God, I arrived safely at Antwerp. Here I am told that the marriage between the Queen and the Duke of Alençon has been announced as certain. In London and all over the country nothing is known of this. It is talked of in secret, but nobody dare speak openly about it. I heard various people mention it in London, and understood that on the 22nd of last month the Queen gave the Duke of Alençon a diamond as betrothal gift. But even this was only conditional apparently, as his brother, the King of France, has first to sign and carry through certain provisions. So a Secretary has been sent to France and his return is now awaited. He may have arrived already, as last Sunday about forty English miles from London I met some French noblemen travelling with thirty-six posthorses. I did ask whether this Secretary was among them but could not find out. It is said that, on the return of this Secretary with the above porvisions assented to, the Queen will announce the marriage to her Council, for by the law of the land she may not marry without their consent. Some think that after this announcement there will be a rising, since the English do not like the French and are grumbling loudly over this marriage. They cannot show this in public, as the Queen keeps very good order.
    On the fourth day after my arrival four Jesuits were hanged and their heads stuck up over the City gates. Some of their companions are still in prison and will fare no better. They are said to have brought a Bull from the Pope to stir the people up. On the afternoon of December 7, I saw the Queen out hunting. Alençon was following immediately after. I stood so close by her that I heard her speak. She does not look so old as she is said to be. The Duke is alleged to be in high favour, some say that he is even allowed into her bedroom. If this marriage should fall through, the Duke will have to be contented elsewhere, or else he will be a general laughing stock. The Queen asked Monsieur de Sainte Aldegonde last week what he had written to the Low Countries about her marriage. He replied that he had signified to His Excellency the Prince of Orange that he hope it would take place. On this she seems to have smitten him laughingly on the mouth with her glove and to have said: “O, que vous êtes bon galant!”  I saw the Duke yesterday and to-day at dinner. On Fridays he is served with fish and on Sundays with flesh. He lives in the Queen’s palace and Mass is said daily in his chamber. Two of the servants of the Spanish ambassador wanted to see how he behaved at it, but they were chased out of the room by the pages and the door was shut.
    About Don Antonio and whether ships are being fitted out for him I have not managed to learn anything. It was being rumoured in London that he was dead, but there were no more recent letters than those brought by me and by the courier who rode out from Rouen with me. So for the present I disbelieve in his death.
footnote: Edmund Campion, 1540-1581, an English Jesuit who was Fellow of St. John’s at Oxford and took his M.A. degree there. On Elizabeth’s visit to the University she was welcomed with a Latin address by Campion. Leicester and Cecil granted him their favour. He wished to become a Professor at the Catholic University which it was intended to refound at Dublin. He ultimately fled from England and went to the English College at Douai. From there he made a pilgrimage to Rome on foot and entered the Order of Jesuits. He was ordained priest at Prague in 1578, and at the desire of Allen went to England with Parsons and the lay brother Emerson. In London he preached to congregations in secret. He and two other priests were arrested for treason and thrown into the Tower. His freedom was offered him on certain conditions which he rejected. After repeated rackings he was allowed to hold public disputations, and Philip, Earl of Arundel, was among his converts. He and his companions Clerwin and Briand were executed at Tyburn on December 1, 1581.
    Robert Parsons or Persons, 1546-1610, an English Jesuit, was Fellow of Balliol at Oxford. For some time he was in favour with Lord Buckhurst. He left England in 1574 to study medicine at Padua, entered the Jesuit Order in 1575, and was ordained priest in 1578. In company with Campion he went to England, where he preached with special zeal to the country gentry. For a while he escaped pursuit by residing with Mendoza. He set up a secret press and published a set of tracts which even reached the Court. In a hiding-place in a wood he printed the famous polemic known as Campion’s Decem Rationes. In 1581 he fled to Normandy. Later on he strove to obtain the liberation of Mary Stuart, and became a zealous supporter of the Guises. He worked very hard to promote a Spanish invasion of Scotland and was despatched to Philip II at Lisbon to submit to him the plans of the Guises. With the same object Creighton was in the meanwhile sent to the Pope at Rome. As these projects came to nothing, he went to Rome in 1585 and remained there till 1588, busying himself chiefly about the promotion of Allen to the Cardinalate. From 1588 to 1597 he lived mostly in Spain, where he founded an English seminary for priests. Together with Sir Francis Englefield, he was untiring in his efforts to egg on Spain against England, publishing outrageous abuse of his country and paying special attention to the Queen and the succession to the throne. Even in James I’s reign he continued his activities. He died Prefect of the English Jesuit mission and was buried by Allen’s side in the church of the English College in Rome.
    Philippe de Marnix, Monsieur de Sainte-Aldegonde, a Netherlands statesman, officer and man of letters, 1538-1598.
See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 43, Execution of Jesuits.

66-67. The French Marriage unpopular in England, but Alençon is living in the Queen’s Palace, though all is uncertain. Hanging of Jesuits in England.
                            Antwerp
                            December 16, 1581.
    The latest London letters dated the 9th and received here to-day give such different views about the marriage that nobody knows what to believe. The Queen is said to behave to Alençon just as if he were her husband and this does not please the English at all. The London letters report that the Secretary from France has obtained the King’s ratification of all provisions, so that the marriage cannot fall through again. Moreover there are no signs of Alençon intending to leave London. It is also stated from London that Calais and Boulogne are to be returned to the English crown. This is said not to be the least important item in the negotiations. Some English Jesuits, come to London from Rome to win over the people on behalf of the Pope, have been arrested. Three have been hanged and two quartered. They are supposed to have practised all sorts of treacheries and to have slandered the Queen disgracefully. Sixteen more have apparently been executed.
    Letters from Seville announce that of the 35 ships, which the King of Spain sent out with 2000 men to build a fortress, only 10 have arrived safe. The remainder have been lost.

67. Alençon is probably leaving England   
                            London
                            December 16, 1581.
    There is a rumour that the Duke of Alençon is to leave here on the 18th or 19th, but it is not yet confirmed. The three Queen’s ships which are to convey him to Dunkirk are ready and the Lord High Admiral is to be on board. Others say the ships are ready to bring the Queen Dowager of France over here. Monsieur de Sainte Aldegonde is awaiting letters from the Prince of Orange and will then leave, whether with or without the Duke is unknown. The Duke is said already to have sent a nobleman on in advance to prepare for his reception at Dunkirk. As for the marriage it is the same old story, a lot of talk but no end in view.

67. He will go to Antwerp
                            London
                            December 23, 1581.
    The departure of the Duke of Alençon has been postponed hitherto owing to contrary winds. The Queen is to give him a naval escort as soon as the weather improves. But this will not be done till after Christmas. Alençon is said to be determined to pass by Dover and Zeeland and so to Antwerp, but he means to return in a month. This together with the marriage plan utterly bewilders many intelligent people, particularly as the Parliamentary session is prolonged to January 18. Fifty thousand crowns cash and 30,000 crowns in bills on France have been sent here for the Duke. The French up to now have shown themselves very munificent.

68. And will meet the Prince of Orange
                            Cologne
                            January 5, 1582.
    In Antwerp letters of December 30th we hear that nothing is likely to come of the marriage between England and Alençon, but England is to lend Alençon a sum of money yearly till he ascends the French throne himself. The Prince of Orange should have gone from Antwerp to Zeeland on December 31st, in order to await there the arrival of Alençon from England, and to receive him. But many suppose that the Prince of Orange will not come to Antwerp after all unless he is asked to and promised a sum of money. What Alençon is going to do will appear in a few days.

68-69. But perhaps he is going to France after all
                            Cologne
                            January 25, 1582.
    In letters from Antwerp of the 20th inst. we are informed that letters from London of the 13th inst. have arrived there not yet giving the date of the Duke of Alençon’s departure. It looks as though he was going straight from England to France and from there on into the Low Countries. If Alençon does not come to Antwerp, Orange will not come either. We also hear that the Prince of Orange has sent Monsieur Aldegonde as well as an Antwerp mayor to the Duke of Alençon in London. When they return we shall know whether the agreement between Zeeland and Orange is to stand. The towns demanded by the Duke of Alençon, Antwerp, Ghent and Flushing, will not admit his garrisons. If they will not have the garrisons Alençon will not go to Flanders either. It is said here that the Queen Dowager of France has gone to Calais. If this is correct it has been done in order to make negotiation at first hand possible. But however things ultimately turn out it seems that the league with England is not yet formed and what will come of it we shall see. Don Antonio of Portugal is said to be buying in Antwerp six hundred muskets and a quantity of other military stores such as spears and halberds. Don Antonio appears to have gone to La Rochelle with Captain Strozzi, and a fleet is to be equipped for him there. This evening there is a tale on Change that the Duke of Alençon is to make peace between the King of Spain and the Low Countries, and this is why the warships in England which were to have escorted him over here are being dismantled. On the English coast two ships bound for Spain have been lost by the carelessness of the crews. They are said to have been worth fifty thousand pounds Flemish. That is a serious loss for Spanish traders in Antwerp.

69. Alençon reaches Flushing
                            Cologne
                            February 15, 1582.
    Antwerp letters of the 11th inst. announce that the Duke of Alençon arrived in Flushing at 11 A.M. on the 10th. With him came a number of English nobles and the Earls. The Queen of England escorted him on land as far as Dover in person. The horses and baggage of the Earls have reached Antwerp. Also sixty Swiss for a bodyguard are said to have come to Zeeland. He is expected in Antwerp with the Prince of Orange and many stands and triumphal arches have been erected in his honour. The English Nation in Antwerp is alleged to have dressed thirty-six persons in flesh-coloured velvet to meet d’Alençon and the Earls. The other Nations too are preparing to receive him. It is said, moreover, in letters from London of the 3rd inst. that the Queen did not like to let him go, but that the Low Countries government was so pressing that he did not like to keep it waiting any longer. It is believed, however, that he will soon return to England. From this we might infer that England has concluded a formal alliance with him and Orange.
“The Queen herself, to doe him Honour, accompanied him as far as Canterbury, and commanded the Earl of Leicester, Charles Howard, Hunsdon, Willoughby, Windsor, and Sheffield, Barons, Sir Philip Sidney, Sir Francis Russell, Sir George Bourchi3er, and some other eminent knights, to wait upon him as far as Antwerp.”—CAMDEN.

70. He is received at Antwerp with great magnificence
                            Antwerp
                            February 24, 1582.
    With an imposing number of smart warships, three of the most distinguished Englishmen and many other persons of high birth the Duke of Alençon arrived here at nine o’clock on the morning of the 19th. The noise of the salute was indescribable. He disembarked outside the town where a handsome staging had been erected. A number of citizens on foot, the officials and the entire English Nation had come out to meet him there. The English were dressed in velvet and mounted. Soon after the Government of the United Provinces led His Highness on to the platform and read out to him an address stating why they had chosen him as their ruler in place of the King of Spain. He took a triple oath to observe the sixty-three Articles read out to him. Then, in accordance with ancient custom, he was invested with the ducal robe, to wit a red velvet cloak trimmed with ermine, and a red woollen cap likewise trimmed with ermine was placed upon his head. Beneath a golden canopy borne by four councillors he was solemnly led through the city. There followed him:  the Prince of Orange, the chief nobles of our country and a few French. On the 22nd inst. the Duke renewed the oath on a magnificent platform in front of the Town Hall. The arms of the King of Spain are everywhere covered over by the arms of the Duke of Alençon. In the Town Hall a gorgeous banquet was held. While all this was being accomplished the English Lords with their retinue remained here. Yesterday they put to sea with a favourable wind, leaving the Duke behind. They have commended the Duke to the government most heartily, and submitted despatches from the Queen of England in which she pledges herself to bring help and security to this land. His Highness has not many troops with him, and it is not known how he will manage to defend the country. No doubt France, England and the Low Countries have formed a powerful league, but the King of Spain will do his best too.

71. English Troops for the Low Countries
                            Cologne
                            March 8, 1582.
    They write from England that this Queen is sure to send the Duke of Alençon English and Scotch auxiliaries both horse and foot. She will place in the field forty troops of horse and twenty thousand foot. Seven ships from Lisbon with foodstuffs have put into Zeeland, from which it is evident that trade with Spain still goes on.

71. English Money too 
                            Cologne
                            April 26, 1582.
    They say that on four ships there have come into Antwerp from England twelve chests containing £100,000. This will put heart into the Antwerpers but will not last long. However, from this despatch of money it can be gathered that England, France and the Low Countries have concluded a definite alliance.

71. The Turks take Laraish
                            Antwerp
                            May 19, 1582.
    Letters from London of May 12 report that with the consent of the King of Barbary the Turks have taken Laraish, so that the Straits of Gibraltar have become exceedingly unsafe. They also say in London that Frenchmen have landed on the coast of Portugal and done much damage. The English ships have sailed for the Moluccas.

71. Where has Don Antonio gone?
                            Cologne
                            July 12, 1582.
    Antwerp letters of the 7th inst. assert that Don Antonio of Portugal sailed from France on June 17 with eighty sail and seven to eight thousand men. Whither he has betaken himself we shall soon learn. Letters from Lisbon of the 14th June have arrived in Antwerp. All they report is that the King has a big fleet ready. It is to escort the ships from India. Portuguese seaboard towns are being garrisoned to prevent invasion by Don Antonio.

72. Not to Bayona surely?
                            Cologne
                            July 26, 1582.
    They write from Antwerp that Don Antonio’s fleet has appeared off Galicia and besieged the town of Bayonne, whereupon His Spanish Majesty recalled to Spain the troops which should have come to the Low Countries. Nobody believes this tale, for already a number of Spaniards and Italians have turned up here and the rest will soon follow. They are to go to Louvain in Brabant where the Prince of Parma is also due.

72. The English and Scotch Troops fall out with the French
                            Cologne
                            August 2, 1582.
    There has been a strong rumour here this week that a regiment of English and Scotch has fallen out with the French. They are said to have fought each other, and a hundred or more English and Scotch are supposed to be dead. The remainder, seven platoons, are believed to have surrendered to the Prince of Parma. And from Tournai come letters of July 27th to the effect that these seven platoons have allowed themselves to be used against the enemy. It is conjectured that the Prince of Parma has an understanding with the Government troops and will bring over more of them to his side.

72. Don Antonio defeated at Sea
                            Lisbon
                            August 16, 1582.
    You will have heard what a victory His Majesty’s fleet has gained over that of Don Antonio. Two or three of his ships, however, attacked the flagship of the Spanish fleet so heavily that they nearly beat it. The brother of the Postmaster-General was on board. Don Pedro de Toledo stood by them with a big Biscayan ship till they had won. Over twenty-two ships were lost, eighteen captured and the rest badly damaged or destroyed.

73-74. But this is doubtful
                            London, September 1, 1582.
    About Don Antonio we hear from France that Monsieur de Brisac has come in with four ships. From this some infer that Don Antonio’s fleet has fared ill. We learn that Brisac and Strozzi sailed straight at the Spanish ships and got so near them that Don Antonio’s other ships, owing to a contrary wind, were unable to help. They fought their way through with some loss of life. But then the two fleets met again and Don Antonio seems to have won. He scattered the Spanish fleet and captured fifteen large ships. But Don Antonio’s side also suffered considerable damage, for the Admiral and Philippo Strozzi and many nobles are said to be dead. The island of St. Michael has surrendered to Don Antonio.
    Another account is that a letter from Strozzi to the Queen Dowager of France has come reporting that he is wounded in the head and arm. This news has greatly depressed the Spaniards here, for they fear that it may be only too true about the victory of Don Antonio. Tidings reach here that the Earl of Mar and others in Scotland have risen against the King. They are supposed to have captured the Duke of Lennox in order to kill him, like the old Governor last year. They wished to restore the Catholic religion. But this project has been thwarted despite his youth by the King of Scotland with the help of his retainers. He has imprisoned some of the Catholic rebels. What will happen next, time will reveal.
    footnote: In the sea-fight off the Azores in July 1582 the French fleet, under Philippo Strozzi, was beaten by the Spaniards, so that Don Antonio’s chances of the Portuguese throne were diminished. The news from Scotland is about the plot to remove King James VI and thus facilitate the restoration of Catholicism.
    Esmé Stuart, sixth Seigneur d’Aubigny, first Duke of Lennox, 1542-1583. He was sent to Scotland at the suggestion of the Guises, with the idea of succeeding to the throne if the King should die childless. In 1581 he was made Earl of Lennox by the King of Scots, and after Morton’s execution his power in Scotland reached its zenith. However, he was expelled the country for alleged Catholicism, went in 1583 to Paris, tried to return to Scotland, but died before he got there.
    Arthur Cossé, Duke of Brissac, Grand Panetier and marshal of France. He served under the Duke of Anjou against the Huguenots, was imprisoned in the Bastille for alleged conspiracy and died 1582. He was a great drinker, and therefore nicknamed “Maréchal des Bouteilles.”

74. Some say he was successful
                            London
                            September 8, 1582.
    About Don Antonio we hear that two of his ships have arrived at Plymouth from Lisbon. They made the passage in twenty days, and report that immediately after sailing they met five or six warships of the King of Spain, mauled them badly and captured their Captains. It is announced that Don Antonio has taken thirteen Spanish ships and sunk some others. He is said also to have got hold of eleven ships of the Indian fleet. Don Antonio’s men here corroborate this. Don Antonio himself seems to have proceeded to San Miguel. However, they write from France that no credence is placed in thee rumours as no ship has yet come in with a detailed report.

74. Tribulations of Spanish Ships in Distant Seas
                            Lisbon
                            September 10, 1582.
    Nine days ago an Indian ship which sailed last March to India with our own ships returned here. She lost her way off the coast of Brazil and met such rough weather that for a long time she could not cross the Line. Finally she had to come home. Four days since we got news from San Miguel that two ships from Portuguese India have come in there. They are bringing Don Christoval de Erasso here in company with six warships. Of the four ships expected from India this year there is no news. Some maintain that this is because the ships have not arrived in India from Malacca and cargoes are short, so they will not sail at present. But nothing is yet known, and the uncertainty makes business slack. In foodstuffs there is nothing doing.

75. Warring Religions in Scotland
                            Paris
                            November 10, 1582.
    It is fairly well known what changes Monsieur d’Aubigny, otherwise Earl Lennox, wanted to make at the Court of the King of Scots. The King removed him from Court thinking thereby to appease his adversaries. but they are not content with this, keep the King under restraint and want him to allow them to force this d’Aubigny into exile, and to confiscate his property. The King is said now to be at Littlebury, d’Aubigny at Dumbarton, a strong fortress on the coast, where with a few men he can hold out for a year against all Scotland. The good understanding long existing between the King and the captive Queen his Mother has caused the King to withdraw his favour from the Huguenots. Monsieur de la Mothe Fénelon, long since Ambassador-in-ordinary to England, has been sent away from here. The Queen of England has despatched two Commissioners to Scotland and offered that King a safe-conduct to come to her. So this fire will probably spread in England too.

75. Elizabeth seems to break with Alençon
                            Antwerp
                            February 12, 1583
    The Queen of England has sent two messengers here this week. We are informed by confidential letters from England that she has dismissed the ambassadors of the Duke of Alençon, the King of France and the King of Spain, who were in England. Also she has kept back a large sum of money which she was about to transmit to Alençon. The Catholics in Scotland tried to send the young King away to France, but they failed and their ringleaders have been imprisoned.

75. Elizabeth seems to break with Alençon
                            Cologne
                            February 14, 1583.
    The Queen of England has sent an emissary to Antwerp to discover the exact truth about the quarrel between Alençon and the city of Antwerp.

76. Rumours of Peace with Spain
                        Cologne
                        April 11, 1583.
    Fresh letters from Antwerp of the 12th state that the marriage of the Prince of Orange has taken place. The Envoy of the Queen of England, who was with the Duke of Alençon, conveyed despatches from Antwerp to the Prince of Orange. They write from Tournay that the Queen of England has laid before the Prince of Parma the draft of a treaty of peace which she hopes to conclude. She requires the Prince of Parma to send this draft at once to Spain, and hopes the King of Spain will accept it. Upon this the Prince of Parma is said to have sent Councillor Richardot to Spain at once, for there is reason to think that the King of Spain will gladly accept the proposal.

76. Don Antonio in Paris
                            Paris
                            May 1, 1583.
    During the last few days Don Antonio has been here with his two sons. They have been lavishly entertained. Eight ships from Dieppe have sailed in support of him and five more are fitting. Some more ships are to join him from England. King Philip’s fleet has been got ready at Lisbon. It was going to sail to the Azores this month, but it is thought that there will be delay, or that it might be used elsewhere, as it has been discovered that the Turk has sent out sixty sail to be met by the King of Algiers with twenty galleys. This force is to operate against the King of Spain, but where it will attack is uncertain.

76-77. Attempts to bring in Turkey against Spain
                            Madrid
                            Spain, May 5, 1583.
    The Queen Dowager of France has sent a ship from Marseilles to Constantinople, to try and persuade the Grand Turk to send a fleet out this year to stir up trouble in the Levant. Certain galleys have already turned up, but it is hoped they will not do much harm. Six more large galleys are being got ready at Marseilles, on pretence of being sent to the Grand Master of Malta. Some think the French would like to make an attempt to catch Spinola’s Genoese galleys, which often sail to and fro with money.
footnote: Amurath III was then Sultan of Turkey, and Jacques de Germigny was French Ambassador at Constantinople. The English agent at Constantinople was William Harebone, the first representative that England ever had in Turkey. He was succeeded in 1588 by Edward Burton.    Ferdinand Spinola, son of Philip Spinola, Spanish Admiral, fell in an engagement at sea off Ostend, 1603.

77. Elizabeth ready to help the States General
                            Antwerp
                            July 30, 1583.
    It is confirmed that the Queen of England has granted the States General twelve thousand English and Scotch auxiliaries. She is ready to pay them with her own money, but desires to have some towns, among them Sluys, pledged to her, until she has received her money back. Some think however that these troops are more likely to be for the use of John Casimir than of the States General, for it is known that he has had some important representatives at the English Court.

77-78. Elizabeth ready to help the States General
                            Cologne
                            August 1, 1583.
    The English Captain Norris, who has long been in the service of the States General, came from England to the Prince of Orange in Zeeland on the 4th inst. He reports that fifteen thousand English soldiers are ready now. These the Queen is to send to the States General. It is known what security she requires for payment. On hearing her demands the Prince of Orange seems to have summoned the States General to see what security could be given to the English. We hear also that Duke John Casimir wrote to the States General that, if they would pay off a portion of their old debt to His Highness, and would give security for the fresh payment, he would bring with him efficient troops, both horse and foot. But as it is notorious that the States cannot pay the men already recruited, still less will they have the means to pay His Highness and to furnish security to the English. It would appear that to put off the unhappy government in this way simply means prolongation of the war and greater ruin for the country.

78. Whom will James of Scotland marry?
                            Antwerp
                            September 24, 1583.
    This week there have been all sorts of rumours here, amongst others that the King of Scots has been to France and is planning marriage with the King of Spain’s daughter. It was also announced that the Queen of Scots, who is a prisoner in England, has escaped and arrived at Calais. But letters of yesterday from London and elsewhere in England say nothing. As for the marriage of the King of Scots, it is said that he is to wed a young lady who, after the Queen’s death, will be next heiress to the throne.
    footnote: orabella Stuart, 1575-1615, daughter of Charles Stuart, Earl of Lennox, younger brother of Lord Darnley, a distant relative of Henry VII. As a matter of fact, her claim to the throne was equal with that of James of Scotland; for a time it was even considered superior. She was subject to constant persecution by James and Elizabeth, and strove to escape by fleeing to France. But she was arrested, put into the Tower, and kept there till she died.

78. Strained Relations with Scotland
                            Antwerp
                            October 15, 1583.
    As we have already reported to you, the Queen of England despatched her envoy, Mr. Walsingham, to the King of Scots. Now when he returned to England, as London letters announce, without having obtained an audience, the Queen called up her entire army and all the people, and occupied all coasts, frontiers and ports. These London letters add that the King of Scots tried to get over to France, but this was discovered and prevented by some of his Councillors. He has put certain of them in prison. He says he is also Prince of England, and is going to set his Mother free from prison. So the sun does not shine between England and Scotland, and may God the Lord dispose all for the best.

79. Scotch and English Soldiers combine in Flanders
                            Antwerp
                            December 3, 1583.
    Hitherto Scotch, English, Walloons and Flemings have been stationed as garrison in the town of Alost. As they could not be well provided with money and also suffered great lack of food, quarrels often arose between them. Yesterday came news that these Scotch and English had drawn up on one side of the town in order of battle, had beaten their drums and proclaimed that all those who were not prepared to place themselves in the service and under the orders of the Prince of Parma should leave the town. Thereupon the Governor of the town at once returned with his remaining troops, and is now lying not far from here. Rumour goes that the English and Scotch have come to terms with the Prince of Parma and promised to surrender the town. Till yesterday it was maintained, on the other hand, that the Scotch and English had only given a false alarm, in order thereby the more quickly and easily to get rid of the other soldiers, so as to be better provided with pay and food in future. However this may be, till close of Change this evening, we have been unable to find out how things are.

79-80. Wrecks of Spanish Ships
unknown
unknown
    During the last few days we have had very bad news from England. Of the twelve ships which left here for Lisbon three weeks ago the best and finest was lost on the voyage down the English coast, with two hundred loads of corn, all belonging to citizens here. Only the crew managed to escape and come here. They say that the ship hung in the wind on a fine clear day, and that they beheld with their very eyes the evil spirit in bodily form, from which they conclude that the ship has been wrecked and destroyed by magic alone.
    Another Hamburg ship was lost at Greenwich in England by the carelessness of the crew. It carried much wax, six bales of silk, some chests of silken garments and Milanese fustian, and a quantity of wool and linen. Most was saved but still much damage was done. We hear from England too that a plot was recently discovered in London. The object was to kill the Queen, and, what is more, the brother of the lately executed Duke of Norfolk was to do it with his own hand. But he failed and was detected, and besides him another Earl and a nobleman have been arrested. As Dukes are no longer wanted in England now, they are apt to use the title Lord. The prisoners are of high birth and will have to suffer a shameful death.

80. Plots against the Queen
Cologne
December 29, 1583.
    A week ago it was announced that a nobleman who was going to shoot that Queen had been arrested. This is not true, only a malicious rumour.

80-81. Plots against the Queen
                            Antwerp
                            January 7, 1584.
    Letters from England this week confirm the news of the plot against the Queen. Many nobles are said to have been arrested, but two of the ringleaders seem to have escaped. There is talk here of the King of Spain fitting out a great fleet against the Netherlands, because he hoped the plot against the Queen’s life would succeed. If it had done so, he would have been able to sail to the Netherlands without fear of England.
    The most important participants in this conspiracy were:
    Edward Arden, 1542-1583, High Sheriff of Warwickshire, apparently an innocent victim of the cruelty with which the conspiracies against the Queen were suppressed. He and his son-in-law, John Somerville, were hanged at Tyburn in October 1583, and their heads stuck on spikes over London Bridge.
    Thomas Lord Paget, d. 1590. He was implicated in the Francis Throgmorton plot of 1583, but escaped to Paris, where the English ambassador vainly demanded his extradition. He lived for a while in Rome, then in Spain, where he drew a pension from Philip II. He died at Brussels.
    Philip Howard, first Earl of Arundel, 1557-1595. His wife openly became a Catholic and he followed her example. Elizabeth had him arrested in 1583 and confined in his own house. Attempts to prove his complicity in the conspiracy failed. He became a Catholic in 1584 and tried to escape from England in 1585, but was caught, thrown into the Tower, and heavily fined. He remained in the Tower till 1588, and on the approach of the Armada held services of intercession with his fellow-prisoners for the victory of Spain. In 1589 he was condemned to death, but the sentence was not carried out, and he remained in the Tower till his death.
    Francis Throgmorton, 1554-1584. Like his father he was a zealous Catholic, and in Paris and Madrid came into close sympathy with the English Catholics residing there. In 1583 he returned to London and was a frequent visitor at the house of Mendoza. He was accused of working for the liberation of Mary Stuart and racked in the Tower, and elaborate plans were found at his house for the invasion of England by the Guises and Spaniards. He was executed at Tyburn on July 10, 1584, but not until he had made frequent confessions of guilt.

81. Plots against the Queen
                            Antwerp
                            January 21, 1584.
    Letters from London in England report that that Queen has had sentence passed upon the persons who tried to assassinate her. One of the oldest women of the bedchamber has been burnt alive, a gentleman of the Court was first hanged and then quartered, another nobleman who killed himself in prison was burnt. Two other gentlemen of high birth are being closely watched in their houses as they have fallen under suspicion. The conspiracy against the Queen is said to have originated in Rome and Spain.

81-82. Vengeance
                            Antwerp
                            February 4, 1584.
    We have received no letters from England this week, but learn through a courtier of the Queen of England that the country is entirely shut off, and that no one can get away from it without a pass and without great danger. This English courtier has gone to the Prince of Orange and confirms the news of the great conspiracy against the Queen of England. At the castle of Greenwich, six miles from London, the Queen’s chamber was to have been blown up with powder. By a lucky accident the secret was revealed, and the Queen had some important people arrested. The French and Spanish ambassadors, likewise all Frenchmen and Spaniards, are to be removed from the country, and the Spanish ambassador is said to have left already.

82. Mendoza, ejected from England, may go to Paris
                            Paris
                            March 4, 1584.
    Don Bernardino de Mendoza, the Spanish ambassador, who has resided in England for many years, and was ejected thence by the Queen, is now here, and many say he will be made ambassador at this Court.

82. Jesuits executed
                            Cologne
                            March 8, 1584.
    Letters have reached Antwerp from England to say that that Queen has executed five Jesuits accused of having a part in the conspiracy against her. There is also an unfounded rumour of the discovery of a plot against the King of Scots. A shot is said to have been fired at him but to have missed. If there should be anything in this we are sure to hear soon.

82. More Warlike Preparations
                            Antwerp
                            April 7, 1584.
    The inhabitants of Zeeland, Holland and Antwerp are fitting out several powerful warships. It is thought they will sail from here to Spain and Portugal. The Queen of England is also said to be about to equip powerful ships against Spain.

82-83. Turkey again
                            Vienna
                            May 12, 1584.
    Letters have come from Constantinople announcing that the French representative there has received letters which nearly caused him to faint. This is because he is dismissed his place and his service in disgrace. Another French gentleman is to go to Constantinople in place of him, with orders to carry on his negotiations with some person selected by the Sultan, because the King of France suspects Sinan Pasha, as he has hitherto shown himself in favour of Spain. The King of France wants Turkey to equip a fleet, to combine with France against the King of Spain.

83. A Christening
                            Antwerp
                            May 13, 1584.
    The christening is to take place at the Prince of Orange’s on the 24th inst. The King of Denmark, the King of Navarre and the Queen of England are to be sponsors.
    footnote: This refers to the christening of Frederick Henry, son of William of Orange by his fourth wife Louise, daughter of Admiral de Coligny.

83. Trouble with Scotland
                            Antwerp
                            May 19, 1584.
    Yesterday we received letters from London announcing that the City of London is putting three thousand men into the field, presumably against Scotland. In Scotland a conspiracy against England in favour of the King of Spain has been discovered. We shall probably hear more details about it next week.

83-84. Precedence at the Funeral of Alençon
                            Paris, 
                            30 June 1584.
    To the funeral of the Duke of Alençon on the 21st inst. all ambassadors except the Spaniard came to St. Maur in company, to show their sympathy with the King and Queen. But as Scotland and England dispute precedence, and Scotland from time immemorial has had the preference at this Court, and the Papal Nuncio refuses to be in the same company as the English ambassador, and the other ambassadors from religious reasons also shrink from him, he was excluded. But he was granted the privilege of being received in audience alone half an hour before the rest. Then the others followed together thus: first the Papal Nuncio, after him the two Scotch ambassadors, the Archbishop of Glasgow representing the Queen on the right hand, and the representatives of the King on the left. Then came the ambassadors of Venice, Savoy and Ferrara. On the 24th inst. the King with his suite and many Princes of the blood, all in mourning, rode into the Church of St. Jacques, where the Duke’s body lay in state. The Queen had herself borne there in a litter carried by horses, to bid farewell to the corpse. On the 25th the corpse was fetched and carried to the Church of Notre-Dame, with so great ceremonies as were hardly finished between two o’clock and evening. The procession was led by four Princes riding on ponies immediately behind the corpse. The ambassadors rode also, Ferrara first, then Savoy, Venice, Scotland, and the papal Nuncio last. With the Savoyard and Scotch ambassadors rode Bishops, by the Papal representative likewise Bishops, by the others members of the Order of St. Michael. The English ambassador stayed at home. although he had received orders from his Queen to ride as far as the church, he had found out that if he were to precede the Scotch ambassador this latter would hold him back by force. Also the Scotch Body Guard would have assisted. So he stayed at home, no little vexed that the Scotchman should have braved him thus and shown himself as representing his King to be a Catholic.

84. Antwerp Sea Trade in Difficulties
                            Antwerp
                            June 30, 1584.
    Warships are being kept at sea to stop supplies to the English, and likewise to those coming from Lisbon, Spain and France. Three ships have been intercepted, two English laden with wheat, one from Spain with molasses. If the embargo is strictly kept, it will cause want and distress in many ways.

84. France, England and the Low Countries
                            Paris
                            August 15, 1584.
    As the Queen of England greatly fears Spain and Scotland, she wishes to conclude a defensive alliance with the Crown of France, but whether this will come about we do not know.

85. England and the Low Countries
                            Antwerp
                            August 21, 1584.
    Letters have been received from England, and Mr. van Aldegonde has announced in Council that the City of London is giving a war subsidy of £4000 in cash and bills. The money is to be received here. It appears that England, in conjunction with Holland and Zeeland, intends to hold this town against the King of Spain.

85. England and the Low Countries
                            Antwerp
                            September 4, 1584.
    Six hundred English soldiers have arrived at Lillo. They were paraded yesterday, and arms were issued to them from here. Another two thousand six hundred are to come without delay.

85. More Losses at Sea
                            Antwerp
                            December 5, 1584.
    A letter comes from Middelburg to say that just lately two fine ships with large cargoes left Flushing for England, having on board from Antwerp many important passengers and traders, with women and children. The malcontents met the ships at sea and fought them for three hours. The two ships finally had to surrender and were taken to Dunkirk. They say the two ships were worth some thirty thousand pounds Flemish. This is a great loss and injury. May God comfort the sufferers!

85. Negotiations hanging fire
                            Cologne
                            December 24, 1584.
    Letters from Middelburg of the 12th inst. confirm that Count Maurice, son of the late Prince of Orange, has arrived there. An English envoy was there also, but as no representative came from the United Provinces of Holland the English envoy went away to Holland. It looks as though the unity of the United Provinces were not so complete as it should be.

86. Suspected Treachery in Antwerp
                            Antwerp
                            January 24, 1585.
    Last week our city was shut off from outside for a whole day, and all were in anxiety. The reason was that three Captains in the pay of the States General demanded passports and leave of absence. From this was inferred a conspiracy to deliver Sainte Aldegonde the mayor here to the enemy. The three Captains are said to have asked the mayor to let them out of the town at night, by opening a gate. The mayor refused this, so without his permission they demanded from the brethren of the Guilds that a gate should be opened, and they should be allowed out. This also was refused. Thereupon these Captains were thrown into prison and are still there. Whether they have already been examined is unknown. But as the malcontents left Flanders for Brabant on the same day it is thought possible that some treachery was planned.

86. France, England and the Low Countries again.
                            Paris
                            January 26, 1585.
    Our only news is that the ambassadors from the Netherlands have long been at Boulogne, and people naturally wonder whether we shall not soon come to an agreement with them. The rumour goes that the King has sent his Master of Ceremonies to meet them. An Envoy Extraordinary is coming here from England, and we shall make our decision here in accordance with the instructions he brings. It is thought however that the Queen of England, as has long been her habit, will dislike spending money. If the Queen Mother here is of the same opinion, no war need be feared, for our King does not ask for war either in public or in private.

86-87. France, England and the Low Countries again
                            Paris
                            February 8, 1585.
    The ambassador of the Low Countries government has been for a fortnight at Senlis fifty miles from here. He is being entertained at the expense of the King. He will not come into Paris before the arrival here of Earl Derby, the English Envoy Extraordinary. By him the Queen of England is sending her Order of the Garter to our King. The English Envoy is stated to have with him numerous nobles and about eighty people all told. He is the guest of the Court, and is to be provided lavishly with food in his quarters as well. The King has sent the Duc de Montpensier and another of our nobles to meet and welcome this English Earl. So far as the Low Countries ambassador is concerned, one may assume that His Majesty is not so zealous for war as his august Mother. Even though no public pronouncement is made at once, something might come of it nevertheless.
    footnote: Henry Stanley, fourth Earl of Derby, 1531-1593, privy Councillor in 1585, one of the Judges of Mary Stuart.

87-88. Antonio Perez in prison again
                            Madrid
                            February 9, 1585.
    Your worship will no doubt be so good as to recollect how about six years since Secretary Antonio Perez, who stood in high reputation with His Majesty, was thrown into prison. He was accused of being an accomplice in the assassination of Secretary Escobedo. However he was released about a year later, though with orders to keep away from Court. After the lapse of four years, people began to think him innocent, and to suppose that His Majesty would restore him to office. But a few days ago, after His Majesty had left here, the aforesaid Antonio Perez was again arrested by one of the magistrates of the Court, and conveyed to a fortress about fifteen miles from Segovia. All his property has been confiscated. There is much talk about this imprisonment, and his responsibility for the murder of Escobedo is thought to be demonstrable. Another idea is that the occurrence is due to the bribes and presents he has accepted. However this may be, it is thought to be a bad sign, and there is anxiety lest he, like another Secretary imprisoned in the summer, may have been in secret correspondence with Constantinople. God grant a better outcome, for this Secretary Perez was beloved by few and particularly harsh to foreigners. I wanted to tell your Worship this in default of other news.

88. France at last joins in the Alliance
                            Antwerp
                            February 21, 1585.
    A few days ago letters came from Cambrai, England and Middelburg, announcing that the negotiations with the King of France to obtain his support for these countries have ended in his deciding to send help. The English write to their representative here to instruct English people, who for the moment are in small numbers, not to leave the place. At Middelburg also where they are to be found with their goods, this nation has been informed that in a few days a change will take place in this country.

88. The Derby Embassy to Paris
                            Paris
                            February 21, 1585.
    Yesterday Earl Derby reached St. Denis, not three miles from here. He has with him a great retinue of nobles.
    The permanent English ambassador at this Court went out to meet him, and the King caused the Duc de Montpensier to escort him on his way. Great preparations are being made to entertain him with banquets, masques and other amusements. The King is putting him up free in the same way as the Dutch Envoy, and much money will be spent. The English here announce that their Queen expelled all Jesuits a month ago. They were first given a gratuity, and then taken to the frontier to go wherever they wished.

88-89. The Garter conferred upon the King of France
    Paris
    March 5, 1585.
    The English Envoy, the Earl of Derby, entered this city in the afternoon of the 23rd ult., and the Duc de Montpensier representing the King rode out to meet him. On his entry he was escorted by four hundred horse. On the very next day he had an audience of His Majesty, and on the following Thursday, which was the 28th of February, on behalf of his Queen he conferred the Order of the Garter upon the King in the Church of the Austin Friars. His Majesty wore the usual dress of a Knight of the Order. In addition to the Knights of the Order here, there were present at this ceremony the Papal Nuncio and the Spanish and Venetian ambassadors. The Garter is valued at fifty thousand crowns. In return the King is said to have prepared a magnificent coach with all fittings to still greater value for presentation to the Queen of England. The Envoy was most honourably feasted at banquets, especially by the King. Next week he is to return to England, and we are not told what other subjects he may have negotiated about here on behalf of his Queen.

89. Sentence on Antonio Perez
                            Madrid
                            March 5, 1585.
    Your Worship was recently informed that Secretary Antonio Perez was rearrested on His Majesty’s command. It is now definitely announced that he has been condemned to two years’ imprisonment, ten years’ banishment, the same period of deprivation of office, and a fine of thirty thousand reals. In time no doubt this sentence will be reduced.

89. English Soldiers in Zeeland badly treated
                            Antwerp
                            March 11, 1585.
    The Queen of England is said to have ordered the return home of the English soldiers who came over here last summer. She seems to have paid Zeeland £500 to facilitate their passage. The reason alleged for this is that the English here are badly paid, and that they are dying of hunger and neglect in their camp in the municipal wood outside the town here. They had expected to be stationed inside the town as garrison. But this is not the case. They would be ready to stay in the country if they were allowed into the town, but it is hoped this will not occur.

90. Another Plot against the Queen
                            Antwerp
                            March 30, 1585.
    It turns out that that Queen in England was to have been assassinated yet again, and this time by one of her principal doctors. After having settled to kill the Queen he fell at her feet and begged mercy for his life, but was thrown into prison all the same.
    The conspirator William Parry was first in the service of the Court and volunteered to keep a watch over English Catholics in France on behalf of Burghley. He lived in that country for a while, and, after a short stay in England in 1582, returned there and entered into connection with resident Catholics such as John and Thomas roter, Thomas Copley, and Edmund Neville. He also approached the Jesuits and eagerly read the writings of Cardinal Allen. He made a plan to kill Elizabeth. In 1584 he came back to England and there betrayed a great plot directed against the Queen. He was elected to Parliament, but opposed a Bill to inflict capital punishment on Jesuits, Seminarists, and the like. Upon this he was arrested, but soon set at liberty again. Shortly after, he was rearrested and made a full confession. He was expelled from parliament and executed in Palace Yard, Westminster, March 2, 1585.

90. Execution of an English Traitor at Antwerp
                            Antwerp
                            April 24, 1585.
    As was lately mentioned amongst other things an English Captain was sentenced to death here. He departed this world on the 14th like a good Christian after confessing his crimes. He was first of all strangled at the stake, then his head was cut off with an axe and put up in the city. His body was buried. Many urgent petitions were made on his behalf, but to no purpose. He went to his death in armour and fully equipped with his sword at his side. He had one hundred and fifty men under him and tried to take them over to the enemy. They hoped to be able to go from here to Bergen-op-Zoom and to sail thence for England. Count von Hohenlohe is now in command of them. He has deprived them of arms and is using them to dig on the dykes.

91. English Help offered to the States General
                            Antwerp
                            May 1, 1585.
    It is reported from Holland that the Queen of England has sent an envoy to the States General at Delft. He offers help to these countries, ten thousand foot and two thousand horse. The Queen is ready to pay these troops, and they are to arrive one month after the pledging of Flushing, Enkhuisen and Briel in Holland.

91. Antwerp in Danger
                            Middelburg
                            May 11, 1585.
    We have little fresh news that is good, as hitherto with this stream not much could be done. Because the citizens are so slow over the work, the city of Antwerp is in great danger. The States General are said to have decided to offer these countries to the Queen of England unconditionally. What will come of it is known to God alone. Yesterday letters of the 22nd ult. arrived from London. We learn amongst other things that the King of Spain laid a plot with the Prince of Parma against the Queen of England, but Her Majesty discovered the secret. It is unknown so far what truth there is in it, but it is said that the plan was to burn her warships. A great lord who tried to escape to France is said to be in prison. When all this became known the Queen went to London and raised there four thousand men ostensibly for the protection of Herself and the city. She also seems to be calling up the people all over the country. Altogether strange things are afoot. Letters of the last day of April have come in from Rouen. They report that all Spaniards of whatever class have to leave the town by daylight. Moreover, an order has been issued that no foreigner may leave his house between seven in the evening and seven in the morning. Death is threatened for disobedience.
    footnote: The siege of Antwerp by Alexander Farnese. The river is the Scheldt.


92. An English Ship escapes from Spain
                            Cologne
                            July 11, 1585.
    Middelburg letters of the 3rd inst. have come in and announce that an English ship has reached England with an official of His Spanish Majesty on board. The King has given orders to detain all ships in Biscaya. The Englishman, hearing he was to be detained, seems to have cut his cables and got his ship away safe. Twenty of the Spaniard’s party who were on board were killed, and the English Captain got to England with the official of His Spanish Majesty and his servants. From them he learnt that the King is about to fit out a great fleet against the Netherlands, and that England is to be attacked also. Upon this, as a letter of the 27th June from London relates, that Queen is fitting out a great fleet too, and Drake the corsair appears to have thirty well-found ships in England. With these he will lie in wait for the King of Spain’s fleet returning from India and New Spain. It is supposed that open war will break out between Spain and England. We shall soon get to the bottom of this.

93. Siege of Antwerp. Doubts as to English Help
                            Antwerp
                            July 22, 1585.
    London letters of the 9th say that the envoys from Holland and Zeeland have arrived there. They have been promised that as soon as possible some four thousand English troops and later on a large additional number shall be sent over. But whether the Queen will pay them herself is unknown. Nobody believes she will. It is also doubted whether she will let so many men leave the country. On the 19th inst. at 11 P.M. the two big powder ships were let loose on the bridge of the Malcontents. We learn here that they blew up with a loud report, and it is declared that they made a large hole in the bridge, and that many of the enemy were slain, but what is true in this I do not yet know. The letters from London quoted above add that some thirty ships from Lisbon are being detained there. They brought a report that a ship had already come in from Calicut, and that the early arrival of the rest was hoped for.

93. English troops at Middelburg. Drake at Sea
                            Cologne
                            August 9, 1585.
    From Holland on the 2nd inst. comes news that six thousand English soldiers are daily expected in Zeeland, and that the Queen of England has declared war against Spain because English ships and English subjects and property are being detained in Spain, and some property has already been sold. The Queen has done the same in England. It is also announced that the Queen will actively support the Hollanders and Zeelanders, and will call upon Denmark and Sweden to help. From Middelburg under date the last of July, comes the statement that Colonel Norris, the Earl of Leicester and Lord Pelham are to be in command of the English troops sent by the Queen in aid of the Hollanders and Zeelanders, and already arrived at Middelburg. Without the Queen’s consent no ship or letter may leave the country in future. The offices of the Spaniards and Portuguese in London have been closed and their trade records removed. Those who refused to submit their books were imprisoned. It is confirmed that Drake the pirate and his fleet are at sea not only to lie in wait for a fleet from Peru, but that he has actually taken an island from the King of Spain and held up some fishing-boats off Terra Nova.
    footnote: Sir William Pelham, d. 1587. He was first Lord Justice of Ireland, where he successfully fought the rebels. He went later on to the Low Countries, and was made a Marshal in the army by Leicester. He quarrelled with the Norris brothers there, was wounded at Zutphen and died at Flushing.
    Terra Nova is Newfoundland.

94. Trade slack in Lisbon
                            Lisbon
                            August 17, 1585.
    Since my last letter no ship has come in from India, though the Buen Viage is awaited with special anxiety. As no Hamburg ships have put in either, trade is almost entirely quiet. Three days ago twenty-four ships came in from Brazil, and sixteen have gone on to Oporto. They bring much sugar and three thousand quintals of Brazil-wood. It is to be hoped this will revive business here, for, as the Dutch ships are still detained, there is no trade. The night before last there was a heavy wind and two of the largest Dutch ships used it to get away. When this was seen they were pursued, but the wind fell again, so they had to be left. The next morning by order of the Marquis de Santa Cruz, all troops were put on the galleys. During the same night of storm eighteen detained ships sailed away, though they had previously been deprived of their sails. It is not known what the could make fresh sails of, so soon and so secretly. The ships still remaining will have to be punished for the fugitives. But the country too is suffering from the detention of the ships, for the prices of corn and provisions have risen greatly all round, and there is a shortage already. To-morrow four galleys are to sail to the islands and elsewhere along the Spanish coast to intercept the English and French pirates. God grant they may soon bring in the overdue Indian fleet!

94. Trade diminishing at Cologne
                            Cologne
                            August 29, 1585.
    They write from Zeeland that the Queen of England is putting off the States General with fair words, and that she does not mean to help them, for she would be taking too heavy a burden upon herself.
    Many Netherlanders are leaving here for Antwerp, Malines, Louvain and Brussels. This is already noticeable on Change.

95. English Redcoats at Flushing
                            Cologne
                            September 6, 1585.
    Letters reach Middelburg from England, announcing that Colonel Norris was first knighted, then made a lord and Field-Marshal. He sailed for Zeeland on the 24th ult. with about eight thousand well-equipped English troops, and more are to follow under command of the Earl of Leicester as General Commanding-in-chief of the whole body. A portion of these men actually arrived at Flushing on the 28th, but Norris and many other officers were driven towards Holland by heavy winds. Among the English are thirty-five Captains, each with a hundred and twenty men in his company. They are all smart men in red c oats, bearing the badge of the Queen of England. Four hundred horse have come over too, and a good number of sappers or trench-diggers. We are told besides that the Queen of England has not decided to take Holland and Zeeland under her protection and away from the King of Spain; all she wants is that the King of Spain should rule his subjects justly and leave them their religion and their privileges. Also all foreign garrison must leave the country, that the Queen may have less anxiety in her own land and be at peace and remain so. We hear also from England that forty English privateers have brought in two ships from Spanish seas laden with Brazilwood and sugar. Captain Drake and his fleet may put out any day with some thirty thousand men aboard.

95-96. Perhaps the English will take Holland
                            Cologne
                            September 26, 1585.
    Letters of the 19th inst. from Middelburg report that Lord Davison, ambassador of the Queen of England, arrived there this week. But as Count Maurice, son of the late Prince of Orange, and the Estates of Holland and Zeeland are now meeting at Delft, the ambassador went on to them. A rumour was also current at Middelburg that the Earl of Leicester and many nobles are to come over from England to take possession of Holland.
    footnote: William Davison, 1541-1608, Secretary to Queen Elizabeth. He brought about the execution of Mary Stuart against the will of the Queen, and was therefore long imprisoned. He was in disfavour with the Queen till her death.

96. English in Florida
                            Cologne
                            October 24, 1585.
    Some English ships are said to have left England six or seven months ago, and to have built a fort in Florida in India. Consequently, all English ships and subjects in Spain and Portugal have been detained.

96. English on the Rhine
                            Cologne
                            October 31, 1585.
    Letters came from London through Amsterdam two days since asseverating that London is surprised to hear that the Queen of England has taken up the cause of Holland and Zeeland. Nothing is known of this in London. It is also said that fresh English troops are passing over daily. That the Queen is sending them is incorrect, but the Consistory of the Calvinists is stated to be recruiting these troops. There is a story circulating too that the States General sent some English soldiers to Nymwegen to capture the redoubt put by the side of the Rhine to stop navigation. The English were twice or thrice beaten back, but at last they charged with such vigour that the Italians who were on the redoubt surrendered.

96-97. Drake raiding in the Bay of Biscay
                            London
                            November 9, 1585.
                            background: (Original in Italian.)
    A ship of the Indian fleet belonging to Richard Greenfield has come in here. She is richly laden with sugar, ginger, hides, gold, silver and cochineal, and is worth a million. Owing to contrary winds Drake’s fleet was still at Bayonne on October 17. It has looted and done much damage to convents and churches and has disembarked 2000 men. The Queen has had a proclamation printed here, giving reasons why she supports the Netherlands and takes them under her protection. She says this protection is the buttress for the alliance which has existed so long between the Netherlands and this realm. She has done it for her own safety, for England could not possibly allow her bitter enemies the Spanish soldiers to rule in the neighbouring country of the Netherlands. Therefore she has caused certain places and districts lying nearest to her realm to be occupied. And the Queen declares that she desires no conquest within the dominion of the Netherlands. But in her Proclamation there is no word to say that she does not desire war with Spain.

97. The Sea unsafe for Trade
                            Antwerp
                            November 9, 1585.
    As the sea remains so blockaded and shut off, commerce is quite at a standstill, and, although those who trade with Spain and Portugal would like to use Flemish ports, they dare not put out even from there because of the freebooters, of whom there are quantities at sea. They have latterly captured Spanish fishermen and carried them off to England, and other ships of considerable importance they have taken to France and stripped completely. God console the losers!  The Zeelanders now have English garrisons in Flushing, Briel and other places, and it is thought that English are to go to Enkuisen as well. Leicester, Essex and Cumberland, all three of them distinguished Earls, are expected in Holland, besides Lord Grey, who is Colonel in Ireland and has lately suppressed great disorder there. Mr. Sidney is expected too, with many other nobles, all of whom will strive to defend Holland.
    footnote: Arthur Grey, fourteenth Lord Grey de Wilton, 1536-1593. Made Lord Deputy of Ireland in 1580, and fought against the rebellion with the utmost energy.
    Sir Philip Sidney, 1554-1586, nephew of Leicester, one of the most noted poets of the English Renaissance, and considered in England to be the ideal of a soldier and man of letters. He fell at the battle of Zutphen.

98-99. The Queen’s Proclamation about the Low Countries
                            Cologne
                            November 28, 1585
    It is definitely confirmed that the Queen of England has taken under her protection those districts in the Low Countries which have not returned to their allegiance to the King of Spain, especially Holland and Zeeland. However, she lays down certain conditions which she has already caused to be published in England. The Proclamation in English is already here, but it is to be translated into German. As soon as this is done, I will send you a printed copy. From Amsterdam we learn that letters received there from London say that the English Captain Drake appeared with his ships in a place near Bayonne, belonging to the King of Spain, and that he pillaged the place and the church and set them on fire. The English warships have brought in many ships from Spain and Portugal which were fishing off Terra Nova. They are said also to have brought in some ships from San Domingo, and to have sunk the flagship.
Postscript.
    The most important point in the Queen of England’s Proclamation seems to be the following:
    She has long seen with what harshness the Burgundian territories of her brother the King of Spain have been and are still being ruled. She has frequently pointed this out to the King of Spain by letter, but he has declined to do anything. Indeed he has held her letters as of no account and has cast them aside. She therefore sent a special envoy to Spain, to call her brother’s attention to this. But this envoy was ill received and returned with nothing accomplished. So she has been moved to conclude with the Netherlands an alliance which her predecessors have long had with that country. And she has done this out of compassion for the Netherlands, though she has also been requested by divers potentates to take these countries under her shield and protection. She has no desire to deprive her brother the King of his territory, but all she wishes is to bring it better government, peace and concord, such as she has effected between France and the King of Scotland.
    Seven hundred Spanish and Portuguese have been brought into England in certain ships. They have to go to the mills all day and grind corn.

99. But is she to be trusted?
                            Cologne
                            November 28, 1585.
    It is further confirmed that the Queen of England means to support Zeeland and Holland. On the other hand, the Earl of Leicester is still absent, though they wrote some time ago to say he might come over any day. Some conjecture that the Queen will treat Holland as she did the Duke of Alençon.

99. Sidney at Flushing
                            Cologne
                            December 19, 1585.
    Lord Sidney has arrived at Flushing as Governor. The Earl of Leicester has reviewed in London before the Queen and Don Antonio of Portugal the horse and foot which are to come over with him from England. The King of Scotland is said to be so well guarded by the best of the army which adheres to the Queen of England that the insurgent nobles cannot get at him.

99-100. Leicester in Zeeland
                            Antwerp
                            December 28, 1585.
    It looks as though in future there would be different news to report and more of it than hitherto. On the 20th inst. my Lord or the Earl of Leicester made a brilliant entry into Zeeland with four thousand men, six hundred horses, and many well-armed and well-found warships and others. He was received with great rejoicing and enthusiasm. It is said everywhere that in the name of Holland Duke Maurice, son of the Prince of Orange, has renounced the Provinces of Holland, and handed them over to Leicester, so that Holland and Zeeland will become quite English. About this there is much pondering among people here. God grant that things may be so disposed that real agreement and sound peace may result. It is said that the Earl of Leicester will hold his Court at Utrecht. With this exception, as almost the whole week was a holiday, we have heard hardly anything from outside, and all wonder what to think about this arrival of the English. The Catholics firmly believe we shall reach a satisfactory peace, but others fear a big war again. Time will show all this in the end. Some days ago it was announced that the King of Spain had sent some emissaries to the Queen of England, and that she had sent some in return, but this is thought to be mere talk.

100. Leicester in Zeeland
                            Cologne
                            January 9, 1586.
    I now hear that England and France can send ships from Zeeland to the Baltic, but not to Spain, so the English will be able to continue their voyages to Emden with impunity.
    The Earl of Leicester brought some three hundred nobles with him from England. He had a splendid reception from the citizens of Middelburg, who stood to arms in full dress. He was also given a great banquet at the Town Hall. The Earl of Leicester seems to be a man of about fifty-two, very sagacious and of handsome appearance. He has already sent most of his troops to Holland, and is now at the Hague in Holland. He has summoned the States General to meet there so as to bring order into all affairs. The Earl of Leicester has with him as bodyguard fifty halberdiers in red cloth and fifty archers in like costume. He lives in great state. The marriage between the King of Scots and the Royal Lady from Denmark is said to be coming off.
    footnote: Anne, Princess of Denmark, 1574-1619, married in 1589 James VI, King of Scots, later James I of Great Britain and Ireland.

100-101. Peace Rumours
                            Antwerp
                            January 18, 1586.
    A rumour is going round among the people here to-day that before long a satisfactory peace will be concluded between Holland, Zeeland and Spain. This is chiefly because the ships in Spain have been let go. Also two Spanish ships have arrived in England. On one of them was an ambassador from the King of Spain, bringing His Majesty’s consent to a twelve years’ religious peace for the Netherlands, although the Queen of England demands one of twenty years. The Earl of Leicester has deprived of their offices all those in Holland who are absolutely determined on continuance of the war with Spain, but left alone those who counsel peace. The Earl says he was not sent over by his Queen to continue the war with Spain, but to strive in every way to bring tranquillity to these countries. Many therefore cherish a strong hope that more negotiations are being conducted in secret than can be avowed publicly. Also very few military operations are being begun at present.

101. Danish Marriage of James VI
                            Cologne
                            February 6, 1586.
    The story goes that the Queen of England’s envoy, who has been in Denmark for some months, and been very handsomely treated there, has certainly effected an alliance between the King of Denmark and that Queen. This envoy is staying in Hamburg and district and in Sweden. There many horse are being recruited in the name of the Queen of England. It is stated too that the King of Denmark has brought about an understanding between Denmark and England and the Hanse towns. The English have also sent an emissary to Emden to negotiate trade relations with that town.

101-102. Blockade of the Baltic
                            Antwerp
                            February 8, 1586.
    Letters from England of the 23rd report that eleven ships have sailed from the Baltic to Lisbon, and have probably arrived there. In order to get to Lisbon, they have steered a course which completely avoids the coasts and harbours of England, but it is announced from England that the Queen has had this way blocked by warships so that it will be impassable in future.

102. More Peace Rumours
                            Antwerp
                            March 15, 1586.
    Many travellers have come from England these days, and they tell us that the Queen there has given orders for the return home of all her warships scattered up and down the sea. Moreover the usual weekly post is going to London; it left at noon to-day. This is significant so long as England is not declared here to be at war with us. It is even thought the English rule in Holland and Zeeland will aim at nothing more than the conclusion of a satisfactory peace throughout the Low Countries. May the merciful God grant this.

102. Spanish Search for Drake
                            Antwerp
                            March 16, 1586.
    We hear from Spain that the Red Indians have killed four hundred English at Satuga. In Spain they are fitting out thirty large warships on which five thousand soldiers are to embark. They have to search for Captain Drake, who has ostensibly gone to Peru.

102-103. Spain and the Hanse Towns
                            Prague
                            March 20, 1586.
    Although the Hanse towns have long been petitioning His Imperial Majesty to afford them some remedy against the infringement of their privileges by the Queen of England, no improvement has resulted. Therefore these Hanse towns have once more petitioned His Majesty, and have announced that if the assistance required is not promptly forthcoming they will be compelled to come to an arrangement with the Queen aforesaid on their own account. This arrangement they will make as favourable as possible to their own trade. Now when the Spanish ambassador learnt this, and heard that the Hanse towns were about to enter into negotiations with the Crown of England, with the aid of the permanent Papal Nuncio to His Imperial Majesty he prevailed upon His Majesty to assure the Hanse towns in writing that he would help them to obtain their rights as quickly as might be. Whether they will be satisfied with this and desist from their project we shall see later on.

103-104. Drake in Santiago, Porto Rico, and San Domingo
                            Madrid
                            April 5, 1586.
    You have already learnt what the English did on the island of Santiago, and how they pillaged and set fire to everything and got clear away. But this unfortunately is not the end of it, for on the 27th March, news dated the 24th came here from Seville, that the English pirate, Drake, after all the damage he did at Santiago, took and plundered Porto Rico and the island of San Domingo. Thy say he has carried off and done damage to the tune of over two millions. He killed or ill-treated all priests and monks he could get hold of, and is fortifying himself in San Domingo too. They fear he has also taken Havana. If His Majesty does not soon provide assistance, no fleet will be able to sail from India or to come from there this year. This is of course a grievous loss and a great danger for all India, and one which hits trade especially hard. His Majesty had information about the plans of this Drake in good time, but paid no attention. Also he gave no orders to the Indian Council or any one else to intercept Drake. Nobody will believe this till we have to bear the shame and loss of it. Now we must expend much money, labour and trouble, and shall be unable to do any good at first. What is more, this will put a check on the success we hoped for in the Netherlands. They say His Majesty has given orders to get ready and equip the fifteen galliots lying at Seville and Lisbon, but not yet quite completed and insufficiently provided with soldiers, and thirty more ships too. But it is to be feared that, as is their custom, they will go about it so slowly that the enemy will manage to carry his plan through first, will fortify himself and do still more damage. May God Almighty grant in His mercy that all may soon be changed, and that this piracy may be withstood. As is also stated, His Majesty has ordered the six hundred thousand ducats sent three weeks ago to Barcelona for shipment to Italy to be brought back, as the cash will probably be wanted for the fresh water. If things had only been looked to earlier, we could have managed with a smaller sum.

104-105. France and the Porte
    Constantinople
    April 14, 1586.
    On the morning of the 11th inst. the French ambassador had an audience with Mesih Pasha, and the latter appears to have submitted his request to the Sultan in open Divan the same morning; namely, the restoration of the ancient privileges which France had had from the Porte for many years, but which had recently lapsed. As it was an express stipulation among these privileges that the English could only trade under the French flag either here or elsewhere in the Sultan’s dominions, the above-mentioned French ambassador has already begun and will continue to struggle to get the English ambassador away from this place and to bring the English Nation under his protection. He is said too to have laid a complaint about the serious injury done to the subjects of his King by the Barbary corsairs. He will no doubt try to double the figure for damages and demand five hundred thousand ducats compensation. But it is thought that in place of cash the French ambassador will be content with getting rid of the Englishman. He may perhaps make a mistake, for there is nothing the Pasha and the Sultan are keener about than money and they only think how to get hold of as much of it as possible. It is believed accordingly that the French ambassador will accomplish nothing in this direction without cash, if only the English ambassador pays a small sum down. To-day, as is customary, the French mission had audience in open Divan, and presented altogether forty costumes, twenty of satin and damask, ten of velvet and ten of cloth, together with gold and silver plate. This is valued at the utmost at a thousand pieces of gold. The Turks are not impressed and have said publicly that the Sultan spent more money on the ambassador’s banquet.

105. Defeat of the English near Grave
                            Antwerp
                            April 26, 1586.
    You have probably heard already that the English dug an entrenchment between the small town of Grave and the river. Thereupon Karl von Mansfeld collected his men to drive the English out of the trench again. The Spaniards charged first. They attacked the English alone and with such fury that they did not await the other troops, and after a long struggle drove the English out of the trench. This they levelled and put the English to flight. Fifteen hundred of them are killed and nearly four hundred wounded. Of the Spaniards two hundred are dead. The English had hoped to come to the assistance of this town during the fight. They failed, so the town will soon have to surrender.
    footnote: Karl von Mansfeld, 1543-1595, Prince of the Empire, son of the Imperial Prince Peter Ernst von Mansfeld, Imperial Lieutenant-General and Captain General in the Netherlands.

105-106. Netherlands Silk for England
unknown
unknown
    The Dutch and English have some ships stationed outside Dunkirk and Calais to stop navigation. The ships from Lisbon to Hamburg are said to be on their way, but it is not known how they will get through. The Italian, Carlo Lanfranchi, a trader, who was with the Prince of Parma at Brussels a few days ago, has requested His Highness’s permission to purchase some silkwares, and take them to the Court of the Queen in England. So this merchant has bought nearly twelve thousand pounds Flemish worth of all sorts of silkwares, and started for England with them yesterday.
    footnote: Carlo Lanfranchi, an Italian merchant resident at Antwerp, who maintained very good relations with the English and later on in combination with one Andrew de Looe was chief partner in a big Italian firm in London, which brought Lanfranchi’s letters to England and delivered them to Burghley. Both exerted themselves in vain for peace between England and Spain.

106. Danish Activity against Spain
                            Cologne
                            May 1, 1586.
                            background: Drake at Nombre de Dios, Cartagena, and Panama
    The learnt at Middelburg on April 18 that the King of Denmark has sent fifteen warships with men and guns to Hamburg, and requires the city not to deliver any supplies to the Spaniards. The answer is not yet known. The Count of Oldenburg is said to have pledged himself to the King to deliver nothing to the Spaniards. The same request has been made to the city of Bremen. The English would seem to have concluded an agreement for one year with the Count of Emden, and the Hamburgers to have renewed their privileges for one year with the English. A despatch caravel from India brings news that the English corsair Drake has captured Nombre de Dios and two castles hard by and taken seven ships. He is even said to have annexed Cartagena and Panama. Earl Leicester is still at Utrecht, and has received much money by ship at Middelburg.

106. Drake at San Domingo
                            Antwerp
                            May 3, 1586.
    The Queen of England has given an English-born Captain, by name Drake, thirty-six ships. He has had twenty French besides, as well as some of Don Antonio’s, eighty warships altogether. With these he has taken the island of San Domingo, and fortified himself there with the help of the blacks. He seems to have liberated and armed the blacks who are slaves of the King of Spain, and to be building all sorts of fortifications there. But whether he will be able to hold them or will make off again with his booty is unknown, as the land is wild and desolate for hundreds of miles round. This news reached the Prince of Parma at the Court in Brussels ten days ago.

107. England and Denmark forbid Trade with Spain
                            Antwerp
                            May 3, 1586.
    Letters of the 24th from Middelburg announce that in England and at Utrecht notices have been made public sternly forbidding, on pain of death and confiscation of property, any ships to sail to Spain, Portugal or other places under the rule of the King of Spain. Also no goods from England, Holland and Zeeland may be sold to Spaniards. The King of Denmark has issued the same veto, and therefore vessels partly laden at Hamburg and Lübeck have been detained by order of the authorities until the ships from Spain and Portugal have come in, so that injury to ships and fighting men as well as to traders may be prevented.

107. Spanish Mission to Italy
                            Lyons
                            May 11, 1586.
    A Spanish mission has lately gone from here to Italy. The King wants many fighting men, for His Majesty has fitted out a strong fleet at Lisbon to offer stern resistance to the English, who have taken San Domingo. But it is not thought that he will accomplish much at present, and eighteen ships seem to have gone subsequently to reinforce the English, and they may be followed by some French ships any day.

107. English Reverse off Gibraltar
                            Paris
                            May 30, 1586.
    They write from London that five English ships coming from the Levant were attacked and taken by the Spaniards to the Straits of Gibraltar. The prisoners were sent to the galleys.

107-108. Nevertheless Trade and the Mails go on
                            Antwerp
                            May 31, 1586.
    You heard that six or seven weeks ago an Italian named Lanfranchi came from England to the Prince of Parma in Brussels. He went down the Scheldt to Zeeland and thence to London, with a quantity of silk-stuffs. A day or two since he returned from England, and brings with him for the Prince of Parma two fine horses and some handsome dogs. There is a lot of talk about him here, and many are surprised that this Italian is able to come here from England with dogs and horses, especially when they are for Parma, as it is much remarked in this kingdom that nobody brings animals from there. But letters from London arrive daily by post notwithstanding, and letters are being sent there from here without any hindrance.

108. English at Emden
Emden
June 12, 1586
    An English Commissioner from the Queen of England and her officers in Holland came here quite recently. Immediately after the Count of Emden arrived, and the next day the Commissioner and other Englishmen were entertained at the Town Hall by the worshipful Council of this town. On the day following the Commissioner had an interview with the Count, and amongst other things required that the Count should abandon the preaching of the Augsburg religion which he causes to be held in a private house. But the Count does not wish to do this, and is taking a few days for reflection.

108-109. English Hold on San Domingo
                            Antwerp
                            June 21, 1586.
    Three or four days ago the representative of the King of Denmark visited the Queen of England with four powerful warships and two others, on board of which were two thousand men and one hundred and forty big guns. On the 9th they sailed back to Denmark. They were so magnificently received and entertained in England that it is wondered what their errand can have been. Letters from Seville report that the King’s fleet sailed recently to pay a visit to the English, who have occupied the island of San Domingo. But the English sailed out to meet this fleet with their own ships and mauled them so that they had to return to Seville. Upon this an embargo was laid on all English goods in Spain, and some write that the English living there have been expelled. The King has convoked his entire Spanish Council in Madrid.

109-110. A French Consular Report from Egypt
Egypt
July 20, 1586
                    background: Copy of a Report of Paolo Mariano, French Consul in Egypt. (Mariano is very well informed about affairs in those countries and speaks their languages like a native.) (Original in Italian.)
    I have received a letter of the 15th of May from Cairo, in which my friends inform me of the occurrence of events of the greatest importance. Pepper at Cairo has risen to 26 ducats. Thirty-six galleons and four Spanish galleys have come into the Straits of Suez. They have been to the port of Mecca, the approach to the Yemen, and have done much damage, and taken many prisoners and a lot of booty, for this district is very populous. They were accompanied by Mahomet Bey, Captain of Alexandria. This man is undoubtedly of Neapolitan birth, and used to be Captain of Mecca. The fleet sent out a pinnace to pillage near Aden. The boat was captured and the Spanish crew confessed that an additional fleet of forty galleys and twenty-five others was expected to construct a fortress in sight of Aden, in a place which formerly belonged to the Portuguese. But I am unaware that the Portuguese ever possessed anything except Aden. When the second fleet arrives, the other fort is to be put up. This is a very important and astonishing affair. And it is certain that they have evil designs upon this country. The people there are greatly alarmed and demand help from the Great Lord. This must be already on its way. Plague is said to have broken out at Mecca, but no report of it has reached me. I tell you this because it is possible that your business requires a knowledge of these occurrences, as trade to India might be the sufferer. Shippers in the Arabian Sea know about the circumstances, and so hesitate to entrust foodstuffs to the merchants of Aden. What they, and especially their representatives at Cairo, will do about it I do not know, as I have no news from that quarter. I desired to inform you of this for my own peace of mind and to your profit, all the more as the Bailo of Venice assure me they have not received the news yet. So I am the only one to pass it on. I beg your Magnificence not to doubt this special information, for I have received it from my friend in Arabic. I have this day visited all the government officials of Cairo, staying here with the excellent Ibrahim Pasha, and he assures me that the Cherif of Mecca has not yet transmitted the news to the Grand Turk. All were amazed and almost beside themselves at the importance of these matters. Given at Pera on the 15th of June 1586.

110. Tension between the Porte and the English and French Ambassadors
                            Constantinople
                            June 26, 1586.
    On the 18th inst. two galleys came here from Alexandria, bringing certain news that the King of Spain’s fleet has come from India by the Persian Sea to within three days’ journey of Suez, and intends to attack Aden. The ambassadors of England and France in open Divan lately brought serious complaints against the Barbary corsairs for having captured many French and English ships. When the Capudan Pasha took the side of the corsairs and answered both ambassadors rather rudely, the English ambassador, as I hear, did not restrain himself against the Capudan Pasha, and got a good talking to from the Grand Vizier. The Frenchman, however, declared he would stay here no longer, as the friendship of his King was esteemed so low. He would let his master know about it, and would certainly soon be recalled by him. Something would perhaps come of it later which would cause little joy here. Everything that had happened here he proposed, as he must answer for it later, to put on record with the Venetian Bailo.

111. Drake is raiding on his own responsibility, not the Queen’s
                            Antwerp
                            July 5, 1586.
    It is definitely announced that envoys are to come over here from England to negotiate a general peace with the Prince of Parma. For this he has full powers. The Queen of England asserts that she never gave Drake orders to make those attacks upon places belonging to the King of Spain, to inflict damage, and actually to continue to do so. This occurred at the instance of Don Antonio. We have news here that Drake has left San Domingo again, but where he has gone with his fleet we do not yet know, as we have had no letters from Spain this week, nor from France either. We only hear from Zeeland that many soldiers are coming over from England every day.

111. Plague in Constantinople
                            Constantinople
                            July 9, 1586.
                            background: Spaniards in the Gulf of Aden
    Regarding the French and English ambassadors nothing new has happened since my last despatch, but both are said to intend to leave here as soon as possible. They, as well as the Venetian Bailo, have already lost several people from the plague, and several others are seriously ill of it. So they have taken up their residence outside the town, the Venetians not far away, but the Frenchman near the Black Sea, in order that they and their people who have not yet sickened may escape.
    My agent informs me this moment that there came by the post yesterday from Arabia Felix a Bey, bringing definite news that the Christian fleet from India has ravaged the whole coast along the Arabian Sea as far as Aden, and has slain over sixty thousand people. They are also said to have fortified an island, and thereby rendered navigation in this sea from Mecca to Suez quite impossible, and to have captured many Turkish ships as well.

112. English in Flanders
                            Antwerp
                            July 19, 1586.
    On the morning of the 16th inst. the English surprised and captured the small town of Axel in Flanders, lying about a couple of miles from the sea. Two companies of German mercenaries were inside, but not more than fifty men all told. The English would seem to have made away with all mercenaries whom they found under arms or on guard. When this was heard of here and at Ghent, horse and foot were sent to Axel to intercept the English. The latter had hoped to take the Ghent road and the small town of Hulst six miles from Axel. But they were mistaken. At Axel there is said to have been stationed an Austrian nobleman, Herr von Schönau, Lieutenant-Colonel of the Count von Barlaimont. But he made off, as he had guarded the town so ill.
    footnote: Florent, Comte de Barlaymont, d. 1626, Governor of the Provinces of Namur and Artois.

112. The Turks do not want Spaniards at Aden
                            Constantinople
                            July 23, 1586.
    Further news coming in and considered correct is that the Spanish fleet has already built a strong fortress at the most important point on the Arabian Sea, whereby the navigation of the Turks is entirely blocked. This has been pointed out to the Sultan, who has held a long consultation with the Grand Vizier. A Pasha is to be sent to Cairo, so that with all that he requires, especially wood which will be sent from here, he may build on the spot a powerful fleet for use against the Spaniards. The English and French ambassadors have, as they publicly admit, relaxed somewhat in their dispute until their masters, on receiving their reports, communicate with them as to their behaviour in future.

112-113. The Diet of Lüneburg
                            Hamburg
                            July 23, 1586.
    Towards evening this day the King of Denmark returned here from the Diet of Lüneburg. Besides His Majesty there were present:  His Majesty’s brother, Duke John of Holstein, the two Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg, the Administrators at Hall and Halberstadt, both Princes of Weimar and Coburg, the Dukes of Merseburg and Lüneburg, the representative of Duke Julius of Brunswick, because His Grace is ill of gout. Also present: Duke Eitel Henry of Brunswick, who arrived at Lüneburg with the King of Denmark, and brought a large sum of money in gold, which he has sent to Brunswick, also an Earl from Scotland, a mission from England, an envoy from the King of Navarre and many other Counts too. All these were in Lüneburg together till the 6th inst. They held no meeting in public, but settled their business among themselves without secretaries. What the upshot of these negotiations may be is kept for the time very secret, but it is thought that anything which has been deliberated so long is finally decided and will be carried out.
    footnote: 1. John, Duke of Holstein, 1545-1622, was brother to the King of Denmark.
    2. Christian I, 1560-1591, Elector of Saxony.
    3. John George, Elector of Brandenburg, 1525-1598.
    4. Joachim Friedrich of Brandenburg (became Elector in 1598).
    5. The Administrator of Halberstadt was Duke Henry Julius of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel, 1529-1589.
    6. The Duke of Weimar was John of Saxe-Weimar, 1570-1605.
    7. John Casimir, Prince of Saxe-Coburg, 1564-1633.
    8. William, Duke of Lüneburg, 1535-1592.
    9. Laurence Bodley.
    10. Ségur.

113-114. Leicester burns Crops
                            Cologne
                            July 24, 1586.
    The Earl of Leicester is now at Bergen-op-Zoom. he has with him seven to eight thousand firehoops to burn the grain in the fields. It is to be hoped the Royal cavalry will stop him at this. Because he does not dare to meet the Prince of Parma in a stand-up fight, he tries to wreak vengeance on the standing corn.

114. Drake at Havana: Is there to be an Armada?
                            Madrid
                            July 26, 1586.
    About that Drake or English pirate we have no news since he took the port of Havana and despoiled the inhabitants of fourteen hundred ducats. But Havana letters of May 4 report that Drake is on the island of San Antonio not far from Havana, to await the fleet there. Havana, however, was garrisoned with two thousand fighting men and had no fear of him. What the twenty galleys which sailed from Seville on the last day of May have accomplished we shall soon hear. God grant they may get in safe and bring out the fleet, so that it does not fall into the hands of Drake. A few days ago they declared here quite positively that some of his Captains had sailed away home from him, ships and all, because he had broken his word over the partition of the booty. There is constant talk of a mighty fleet which our King is to fit out next year, and send against England. But it does not look much like it at present, and as the custom is here they will go to work slowly, just as in everything else, and wait till the loss has grown very great.

114-115. Is there to be an Armada?
                            Madrid
                            July 29, 1586.
    Nobody knows whether our King’s fleet is strong enough to undertake an expedition against England. What preparations one sees conflict with the idea of a serious enterprise. On the last day of May twenty-five ships, among them eighteen well-found galliots, with three thousand soldiers on board, sailed from Seville for India, as is stated with orders to look for Drake, and drive him away and escort the fleet to Europe. But this cannot well be done before next March. It was announced recently that His Majesty has news from Alexandria that the ship Buen Viage has again arrived from India, and that the Santa Maria had not yet started. So one might, and God grant it, expect these two this very year. Since this we have had letters from Lisbon saying that a caravel has arrived there from the Azores, the sailors on which declare that they saw, not far from the above-mentioned island, two big ships which could only have been Indiamen. They tried to examine them, but failed from bad weather and contrary winds. There is much talk to the effect that these were the Buen Viage and the Sana Maria. May the Almighty so dispose and bring them both back safe!  That would be such good news!

115-116. English at Gravelines and Dixmude
                            Antwerp
                            August 2, 1586.
    The Earl of Leicester lies with his English troops ten miles away from Alschot. He seems to have been in the town himself because some soldiers there had mutinied. The town is said to be very strongly fortified, and although Mondragon is in Flanders with a strong detachment, he is accomplishing nothing against the English. With their supporters they made an attack against Gravelines, where the Governor had an arrangement with the English Captain, Lord Stanley, to hand him over the town for a sum of money. Now, when the English Captain with six hundred English soldiers arrived before this town last Saturday, and sent in his Lieutenant with some men, as he himself was suspicious, the inhabitants of the town killed these soldiers, about fifty in number. So the English Captain moved back to Dixmude, where his plans likewise failed.
Sir William Stanley, 1548-1630, served first under Alva in the Netherlands, then went to Ireland where he, although a Catholic, served the Queen loyally for fifteen years, and showed great efficiency in fighting against the rebels. Later he seems to have been involved in the Babington conspiracy. In 1586 he fought with success in the Netherlands under Leicester. In January 1587 he surrendered Deventer to the besieging Spaniards, and then entered Spanish service. At that time he was completely under the influence of the Jesuits. Soon after he went to Spain to push on the invasion of England. In 1591 he was in Rome to consult with Allen and other enemies of the Queen. Subsequently he went often again to Spain, where he passed the remainder of his life in rather poor circumstances.
foonote: Christopher Mondragon, 1510-1596, a Spanish General who became a Field Marshal in the Netherlands under Alexander Farnese.

116. Leicester is no use
                            Cologne
                            August 21, 1586.
    The longer the Hollanders and Zeelanders have their English and their Earl Leicester the less good they do. Leicester deposes officials wholesale, throws the most distinguished into prison, and replaces them by others who agree with him. By this means he will perchance soon come to a bad end. It is loudly asserted that he has sent out four Captains of horse, each one of whom is to recruit a thousand horse, each individual of which is to receive four Rose Nobles as recruiting money. He is believed to have sixteen hundred horse already, but they will not march unless a Prince or an Imperial City stands surety for their pay. The Viceroy of Ireland with two hundred and fifty horse and a thousand foot has again come as subordinate to Leicester. The infantry are said to be very poor stuff.
    footnote: The rose noble was an English gold coin minted from 1343 till 1644, current at various times for 6s. 8d. and 10s.

116. Drake is in Ireland or Scotland or perhaps London
                            Cologne
                            August 21, 1586.
    Although letters reach some saying that Captain Drake and his fleet have reached Ireland, others hear the report that with twenty ships and great wealth he has arrived in Scotland. He has brought with him as well eight rich Spanish ships which he took in the Spanish seas, and his arrival in London is expected every day.

116-117. Spanish Success in the Red Sea
                            Constantinople
                            September 5, 1586.
    A short while since the English Consul, now staying with the English ambassador here in order to push through some of his business with the Porte against French opposition, received reliable information from Cairo that the King of Spain had issued a proclamation at his new fortress of Cameroon and throughout Yemen that all those who would submit to him should be free of all taxation for fifteen years. It is thought that, owing to this, most of the population will submit to the King of Spain. Only feeble preparations for resistance are being made here. They say they must first have instructions from the Governor of Suez what preparations to make. Great though the outcry of people here was at first it has now completely died down. They seem to have become confused themselves and to be unable to make up their minds. But for the moment they say that more and more Arabs are adhering to the King of Spain daily. The longer he stays the more does the French ambassador lose the respect of the Turks. They recently carried off one of his servants by force, and thrashed his dragoman before his eyes, though the ambassador had his sword at his side. He is always quarrelling. Apparently the air of Constantinople no longer suits him, and he daily awaits his King’s order to depart.
    footnote: Cameroon. Not to be confused with the Portuguese settlement in West Africa.

117-118. Drake in London with Great Wealth
                            Antwerp
                            September 6, 1586.
                            background: The Queen shot at
    London letters of the 29th ult. recently received announce that Drake the pirate has arrived in London from India with fifty to sixty ships. He is said to have brought great wealth with him, but the ships are not yet unloaded. They also write of an important case of treason against the Queen’s life. Monsieur de Guise had arranged with certain nobles to come to England, but the conspiracy was discovered, and some sixty persons, many of high birth, have been imprisoned. A man who came here from England recently says that this plot took place before his departure from London, and that an Englishman shot at the Queen. But before he fired, the bullet, without his noticing it, fell out of the pistol, so he missed her. Nevertheless the Queen’s hair seems to have been singed. The Earl of Leicester is stated to have pitched his camp between Utrecht and Amersfoort.
    Anthony Babington, 1561-1586, English conspirator. For some time he was a page to Mary Stuart and seems to have taken part in the conspiracy of Campion and Parsons, and then to have been in Rome for a while and to have been commissioned there to effect the liberation of Mary. In 1586 he assumed direction of the conspiracy in favour of the Queen of Scots, in which Spain also had a share. So sure were the conspirators of success that Mendoza actually wrote home about the impending death of Queen Elizabeth. Mendoza described Babington’s plot as the most serious of all those directed against the Queen. However, Walsingham’s spies kept watch over Babington, and in August 1586 he was arrested and in September condemned to death together with his confederates, Chidiock, Titchbourne, Thomas Salisbury, Robert Barnewell, John Savage, Henry Don, Edward Abington, Charles Tilney, Edward Jones, John Travers and others. Babington and five of his accomplices were dragged through London on hurdles and executed in Holborn on September 20.

118. The Wild Irish
                            Cologne
                            September 15, 1586.
    The Earl of Leicester seems to be assembling his army. There are about fifty-five companies of foot, and twenty-four troops of horse and fifteen hundred Irish as well. These Irishmen are almost all naked and have their bows and arrows with them. They are very quick runners, and there are also some hundreds of them who go on stilts the height of a man. They are to walk through the moats surrounding the towns and climb the walls.

118-119. What will King Philip do next year?
                            Madrid
                            September 20, 1586.
    Nothing has been heard of the twenty galleys which went to India to convoy the fleet home, but, as Drake seems to have reached England on August 8, it may be presumed that the fleet will be in by the end of October. The twenty galleys were not worth the money they cost, since Drake has come back unharmed. God grant that he may not, as they say, be fitting out a fresh fleet to do still more damage. There is indeed a rumour that His Majesty intends next year to equip a great Armada and make an expedition against England, and that the twenty galleys aforesaid are to be used for this. His Majesty is accumulating great quantities of cash, and this may be taken as a sign of preparations. So also the loan which His Majesty is getting taken up by the Frankfort Fuggers. May God Almighty grant that all may turn to the weal of Christendom, to peace and to unity. God forfend that the Turk, as is confidently asserted on all hands, should send a hundred galleys out next summer, as the Queen of England is supposed to have suggested. She is to help him to send these ships against Spain. If he did we should have enough to do with our own defence, and could do nothing against either England or the Netherlands. It is also rumoured that the King of Spain is to impose fresh taxes. The Florentines and Genoese are thought to be coming to our help with some galleys. This they have offered and consented to do. It looks too as though His Majesty had some great enterprise in view for next year. God dispose all for the best. Your Worship has probably heard that in August a corsair surprised and pillaged one of the Canaries, and carried off many Christians. When on his return he was about to pass through the Straits of Gibraltar, he was lost in a storm with his ships and all his booty, and thus he got his reward from God.

119-120. Plots against the Queen
                            Cologne
                            September 25, 1586.
    Under date of the 15th, it is reported from Middelburg that London letters of the 6th and 12th inst. bring news that noblemen are being daily taken to prison. Besides the Guises, who waited with a fleet and three thousand men at Biscay, French ships are thought to have been ready in other places to invade England. The Queen of Scots too is accused of complicity in the plot against the Queen of England. She was arrested when hunting, and is now watched more closely than before. Her suite has been removed, and two of her secretaries have been brought to London. Her papers also have been taken away and examined. In London many ships are being prepared, and the Englishman Drake has not yet dismissed his warships and their crews. Some of the warships of the Queen of England are lying at Portsmouth. Some ships from San Lucar are said to have arrived in London, but they only bring salt and news that the merchants in Spain are fitting out a fleet for India.

120. England and Turkey
                            Constantinople
                            October 1, 1586.
    The English ambassador is again energetically pursuing his intrigues against the King of Spain. He was recently in audience with the Grand Vizier, and urgently requested the equipment of a fleet against the King above mentioned. To this the Grand Vizier answered that he should write to his Queen, that she could be assured the Sultan would not be backward next spring, but she must spare no efforts on her part either. I hope however that I shall not witness anything of the sort, as we hear no more about it, and there is no sign to be seen of any such enterprise.

120-121. Zutphen. The Irish killed like dogs
                            Cologne
                            October 9, 1586.
    A week ago I informed you how the Rhine bridge has been prepared, and a redoubt placed on each side. The English thought that with their fresh men they could carry the strong redoubt on the right side opposite Zutphen. When they advanced upon it and began the attack, the Prince of Parma, stationed hard by, was warned, and he marched at once to meet the enemy. On the 3rd inst. he reached the main standard of the English, called the Blue Standard, hoisted a mile and a half from the redoubt which the English had attacked. He repulsed them completely and took fifty-six prisoners. Then with his entire force His Highness pushed forward and attacked the English, who were already storming the redoubt, with such effect that over a thousand were killed on the field. The English lost as prisoners many of their own troops and others. Amongst them were thirty wild Irish who look so strange that the devil himself would fear them. They at once begged to be killed and not to be taken before the Prince of Parma. So when His Highness heard this he proceeded forthwith in person to see and to examine them. But they refused to answer His Highness, and as they were found to be ill of the plague he immediately had them killed like dogs. There are four or five hundred of these Irish over here. Probably now that the winter is coming they will go back home for they are naked savages. Now when the English had retired, the Prince determined to give them no time, but pursued them with such fury that he routed their entire army and took eighteen colours. How many of them are fallen it is not yet possible to know, but as so many colours have been captured there are probably many dead. From the French, who were also in the battle, the Spaniards will get more loot than from the English and Irish.

121-122. Details of the last Conspiracy against the Queen
                            Cologne
                            October 23, 1586.
    We hear from Middelburg under date the 9th inst. that news has reached there from England that of the eighteen conspirators brought before the Courts, fourteen have been hanged. These confessed that they meant:
    1. To assassinate the Queen of England.
    2. To admit the French and Spaniards into the country.
    3. To liberate the Queen of Scots and put her on the throne.
    4. To burn down and loot the City of London.
    5. To murder the members of the Privy Council and other distinguished supporters of Her Majesty.
    6. To burn the warships and appropriate the guns.
    7. To kill various knights and noblemen in the country.
    More conspirators are being imprisoned in England every day. The Queen has summoned Parliament to discuss what is to be done with the Queen of Scots, as she has not ceased to devise evil against the Queen of England.

122-123. Wrecks off Ostend and Savage Executions in London
                            Middelburg
                            October 23, 1586.
    Two days ago a couple of ships came over here from England, and though some thirty ships were lying at anchor over there, so that they might make the crossing in concert, the wind did not suit them, as it was blowing a gale, so they sailed back to London. One of the ships, which was sailing in company with the two above mentioned, was wrecked and all three were so driven by the gale that they got ashore on the Ostend sandbanks. There they lost all their sails and had to drift at the mercy of God. Finally the two ships reached here safely on the flood. On the one ship all the passengers and the German mail are said to have been lost. Those who came over on the two ships which were saved report that fourteen of the conspirators against the Queen of England have been executed. Some were quartered alive, among them a Jesuit, others executed with the axe, others again with the halter. One among them was dragged at the horse’s tail from prison to scaffold through the streets. His mother had offered to give as much money as the horse could carry from the prison to the place of execution. This mother had also offered to maintain at her own cost a company of mercenaries for so long as the war should last in Holland and Zeeland, if only her son might be kept in prison for life. All she desired was to save his life and shield him from so shameful a death. But this was quite useless, and the course of justice was not interfered with. Those executed implicated the Queen of Scots in the conspiracy in order to destroy her. Parliament is assembled to judge whether this Queen has not forfeited her life. After the execution of these fourteen persons a new plan was discovered, to shoot the Queen out hunting. So five people, all of English birth, nobles and courtiers of the Queen of England, were at once imprisoned and a few days later quartered alive.

123. Zutphen. Was it a great Spanish victory?
                            Antwerp
                            October 25, 1586.
    It was recently reported how at the fort here the big gun was fired and the big bell rung because the town of Zutphen had been provisioned and the English defeated. This was later put in print, but, as the servants of the municipality by order of the magistrates subsequently confiscated these bulletins and took them away from the vendors, it may be assumed that the victory was not so great as was boasted when they gave it out.

123. Incrimination of Mary Queen of Scots
                            Antwerp
                            November 1, 1586.
    The announcement comes from Zeeland that the Earl of Leicester has given permission by licence, which has to be purchased, for ships to sail to Spain, Portugal, France and other places and to export merchandise, but with the exception of munitions and food-stuffs. On September 20th and 21st, O.S., fourteen of the conspirators against the Queen of England were executed. They confessed that the Queen of Scots was the instigator of this conspiracy, wherefore Commissioners have been despatched to examine her.

123-124. Arrival of part of a Fleet from New Spain
                            Madrid
                            November 6, 1586.
    God be praised, the fleet from New Spain has arrived safe at San Lucar. What gold, silver and merchandise it brings for the King and for private individuals I will report later, also how eight of these ships were lost, though the crews and cargoes were saved. It is thought that the continental fleet which is to bring seven millions in gold and silver has not yet assembled, and will not come out till next spring. May the Almighty in His loving-kindness protect and guard from harm and woe the fleet which sailed from Seville on October 23, and is to bring back twelve millions. Further news that I hear is as follows. With the arming of the so-called Armada against England progress is small and slow. It is true that in the last few days some Spaniards have agreed to make a loan to His Majesty amounting to one hundred and fifty thousand ducats, the money to be delivered at Lisbon in one month. And with it some soldiers, brought there from Andalusia, are to be paid. Then some new warships are to be completed. But what will finally come of the thing next spring will allow us to see.

124. Trial of Mary Queen of Scots
                            Cologne
                            November 13, 1586.
    It is announced here from Middelburg that the English Captain Drake arrived there on October 30, and proceeded to the English camp. He has brought over £50,000 in cash, and as much more in bills as the Queen of England could raise through English merchants. At Rouen in France English ships and property have been detained because a pirate stole to the value of £4000. So about £6000 in costs will be entailed. Letters dated the 8th have reached Middelburg from London. In them it is confirmed that many members of the nobility and of the Council, with two thousand horses, have ridden sixty miles away from the city to conduct a trial of the Queen of Scots. It is thought she would not be indicted in this manner if she alone had caused the conspiracy against the Crown, but, as so many lives have been lost because of it, further proceedings are to be taken against her.

124. Death of Sidney
                            Cologne
                            November 20, 1586.
    Our letters from Middelburg, of the 6th inst., report only that the English Lord Sidney has died of the gunshot would received before Zutphen. His body will be sent over to England for burial.

125. Spanish Success at Sea
                            Antwerp
                            November 22, 1586.
    Letters from Madrid in Spain dated the 19th ult. came here this week. They announce that of the English warships, a good number of which sailed from England to loot in Spain, fifteen have been sunk by the Spanish fleet. It is also reported that His Majesty is making great preparations in Spain and Portugal for some enterprise against England in the spring. In Holland they hear that the Earl of Leicester has gone to attend the Parliament in England, and that from each province and town under the jurisdiction of the Queen of England he will take with him two representatives. Parliament will certainly meet in December.

125. Complaints from Algiers
                            Constantinople
                            January 4, 1587.
    Last week some nineteen Englishmen were brought in here from Algiers. They seem to have done much damage there with an English ship, as they looted a lot and kidnapped many Turks and Christians. Moreover, it has been heard here that the Spanish galleys have apparently carried off fourteen of the best Algerine galliots.

125. Condemnation of Mary Queen of Scots
                            Antwerp
                            January 17, 1587.
    In London letters of the 1st inst. they write that Parliament is closed, but is summoned again for the 3rd or 5th of February. An edict seems to have been issued declaring that the Queen of Scots has forfeited her life. but the Queen of England does not wish justice to proceed further, and will only keep the Scots Queen prisoner. The final decision of Parliament in all this ruinous struggle is awaited with much eagerness by every one. It is said that the Queen of England aims at absolute control in Holland and Zeeland, but certain Holland towns will not concede this.
    footnote: See Fugger News-Letter (First Series), Letter 77, Death Sentence on Mary Queen of Scots.

126. Further English Outrages on the Spanish Coast
                            Lisbon
                            January 21, 1587.
    The news I have to report is that the galliot of the Duke of Florence, which was lying at Cadiz for two months, came in here to-day. The English pirates can be seen in quantities off our coast now. Yesterday with nine ships they appeared off Cape St. Vincent and intercepted many salt ships bound hither from Cadiz and other ports and laden also with wine and other things. They have also carried off two other ships from Brazil lying off the fort of the harbour of St. Vincent. This fort could not rescue the ships because it had no powder. It is really pitiable how little trade there is in these dangerous times. Here one can detect little of any preparation for an Armada. Great stores of food and provisions are being collected. The fleet which came here last year from Biscay is refitted, twenty big ships and twenty-four little ones. They are supposed to sail out from here daily to guard the coast, but most of the soldiers who were on board, and others too brought from Andalusia, have run away.
    The Grand Duke of Florence was Francis I, Grand Duke of Tuscany, 1574-1587.

126-127. French Intercession for Mary Queen of Scots
                            Cologne
                            February 6, 1587.
    The King of Denmark’s envoy, son of His Majesty’s governor, has been graciously dismissed by the Prince of Parma. His Highness presented him with a gold chain. But as he was travelling from Brussels the freebooters of Bergen-op-Zoom captured him and carried him off there. But, since he is a representative of Denmark and his King has offered to be an intermediary in the peace with England, he was allowed to go on again. They say that His Royal Highness will send Monsieur de Champagney and President Richardot to England. In the last letters from London we read that Parliament has deprived the Queen of Scots of all her Royal robes and dignities. Her lodging is said to be draped entirely in black. But the French and Scotch envoys are still there, begging for the life of the Queen.
    Jean Grusset, called Richardot, 1540-1609, President-in-Chief of the Privy Council of the Netherlands. Despite the strict Catholicism of his family he threw in his lot with the rebellious provinces of the Low Countries, but re-entered Spanish service on the request of Prince Alexander Farnese. The most delicate diplomatic affairs were entrusted to him. In 1597 he was made President-in-Chief of the Privy Council and maintained this position under Archduke Albert.
    Frédéric Perennot de Champagney, 1530-1595, son of the Chancellor Perennot de Granvella, who served Charles V. He was Governor of Antwerp, and President of the Flanders Council of Finance. He espoused the cause of the rebels and fought against Margaret of Parma.

127. A fresh Plot traced to the Queen of Scots and the Guises
                            Antwerp
                            February 14, 1587.
    In letters of the 24th ult. from London it is reported that more treason against the Queen of England has been discovered. Some French are said to be in prison because of this, and the French ambassador has been confined to his lodgings. Some English gentlemen are said to be in prison too. It is stated that this treason originated with the Queen of Scots and the Duke of Guise. From Brussels it is announced that the citizens at Haarlem and in Guelderland have expelled the English soldiers quartered there and submitted to the King of Spain.
    In addition to Monsieur de Belliève, specially sent to London to save Mary Stuart’s life, the permanent French ambassador was Monsieur de Chasteauneuf. The latter was accused of complicity in the conspiracy against Elizabeth contrived by Stafford, but he was innocent, and the error was promptly recognized.

127-128. English Treachery in Overyssel
                            Antwerp
                            February 14, 1587.
    The report of the 7th inst., that the town of Deventer has submitted to the King of Spain, is founded upon truth. The town was occupied by eight hundred English and Irish soldiers. Their Colonel was an Englishman, whose brother is still Custodian of the regalia in England. He had an understanding with Verdugo, the Governor of Groningen, the Corporation of Deventer and the citizens, and thus they gradually drove the English soldiers from the town and admitted Spaniards in their stead. The town has made a four years’ agreement with the King of Spain. The English in Bergen-op-Zoom are also said to be ready to surrender the town to the Prince of Parma.
    Francis Verdugo, 1531-1595, Admiral-at-Sea, Royal Spanish General-Field Marshal, fought with great success for Philip II in the Netherlands. For instance he defeated the English Colonel Norris near Noordhoorn in 1581.

128-129. Elizabeth opposed to the Execution of Mary
                            Antwerp
                            February 21, 1587.
                            background: Recall of Leicester
    Yesterday letters of the 7th inst. came from London. They report that some envoys have waited upon the Queen of England to intercede for the life of the Queen of Scots. It is unknown what they have effected, though it is not believed that the Queen of England will permit her to be executed. The French ambassador is said still to be confined to his lodgings. It is also announced that the envoys of Holland and Zeeland have arrived in London, and that these provinces have entirely abandoned themselves to the Queen of England. An English ship is said to have reached England from Spain despite the detention of all ships there, and to have reported that English ships in Spain are in all cases forbidden to sail. So the Queen of England is having all large ships, foreign and English, detained and armed. She has six war vessels composed of her four big warships and of foreign ones lying off Dunkirk in order to keep them safely there. In place of the Earl of Leicester it seems that Lord Russell is to be Governor of Holland and Zeeland. From France we hear that the property, persons and ships of all English have been seized by the King, and from Brussels that the Court intends to forbid all trade with England and that open war is to be declared against the Queen of England.
    Sir William Russell, Baron Russell of Thornhaugh, 1558-1613, Leicester’s companion in the Netherlands and support in difficulties with the States General. Later on he became Governor of Flushing, then Viceroy of Ireland, where he successfully fought the rebels.
    footnote: See Fugger News-Letter (First Series), Letter 79, Execution of Mary Queen of Scots.

129. Execution of Mary Queen of Scots
                            Middelburg
                            February 26, 1587
    We received news from London this week that judgment had been passed on the Queen of Scots, but that successful efforts had been made to change the sentence into one of imprisonment for life. Since then, however, there has been trouble of all sorts in which this Queen has been implicated. Therefore she was executed in the castle of London on the 20th inst. It seems that she went to her death unwillingly and that in her last moments she accused the King of Spain, the King of France and the Pope of having failed to keep the promises they had made her and of having forsaken her utterly. On hearing this the people in the city were delighted. An order was subsequently published that all those sailing as privateers should attack every vessel coming from France and spare no one. Captain Drake is to hold himself in readiness to take measures in case France or Spain should make any move against England, but such good preparations have been made everywhere that it will not be easy for Spain to do anything. Much arming has also been done, and the Earl of Leicester is again expected here with some thousands of men, as the Queen is entirely taking up the cause of these countries and giving them every assistance.

130. Peace Negotiations
                            Antwerp
                            February 28, 1587.
    Monsieur de Champagney is said to be conducting secret negotiations for peace with Lord Burleigh, Lord High Treasurer of England, in order to see whether it is possible to enter into formal negotiations. On this business a certain Andrew de Looe seems to be travelling backwards and forwards, and to have been sent from Brussels this week with a promising reply.

130. Ships impounded on all hands
                            Madrid
                            March 2, 1587.
    A special messenger to His Majesty from Lisbon arrived to-day. He took horse on the 25th ult. and reports that all Hamburg and other ships there have been seized. The Marquis de Santa Cruz has visited the largest and finest lying in the harbour and has given them orders to unload their cargoes within four days, since His Majesty requires them for His own purposes. The others, not being wanted, hope that the Marquis will set them free. Six galleys and other ships with soldiers from Italy are expected daily. They say almost a hundred ships have put out from England, destination unknown. The Marquis has sent many caravels to the islands and other places. God grant that loss may be averted.
    Alvaro de Bassano, Marquis de Santa Cruz, 1510-1588, a really efficient Spanish Admiral, who died just before the Great Armada put to sea. He was replaced by the incapable Medina Sidonia.

130. Archduke Mathias to marry Arabella Stuart
                            Antwerp
                            March 7, 1587.
    In letters of the 18th ult. from Hamburg we read that the Archduke Mathias has arrived there quite incognito with four or five attendants. He left there to visit the King of Denmark, and will pass thence to England to marry the Queen of England’s cousin.

131. The Guises will fight England
                            Antwerp
                            March 25, 1587.
    This week we had news from France that the King of that country will not consent to war with England. So the Guises and their adherents will carry on the war on their own account. With this object they have already assembled a large number of horse and foot in Picardy. They had meant to filch Boulogne from the King, but as the Governor heard in time he was able to frustrate their attempt.

131. Disputes between Holland and Zeeland
                            Cologne
                            March 26, 1587.
    Letters from Middelburg of the 19th report that parliament in England is still assembled. The States General would not consent to hand over their country to the Queen, and that is why Parliament is still sitting. The Zeelanders seem ready to stand in with the Queen. In Holland the States General have held a Council and determined not to allow themselves to be ruled over by the Queen of England. They have apparently made Count Maurice of Nassau Governor and the Count von Holloch Lieutenant-Governor, and propose to despatch garrisons to Utrecht, Haarlen, Briel and other places, but these towns refuse to receive them. It looks as though Holland and Zeeland would separate.
    Philipp, Count von Hohenlohe, 1550-1606, repeatedly called in these letters Count von Holloch. He was a son-in-law of William of Orange, came to Holland in 1575 and fought for the freedom of the Netherlands. In 1577 he brought about the capitulation of Hertogenbosch and was placed in supreme command of the northern portion of the Low Countries. His quarrels with the States General were frequent and serious, and his attempt to relieve Antwerp failed. Round him centred all the opposition to Leicester, and after the latter’s departure he retained his command under Maurice of Nassau.

131-132. Success of English Diplomacy in Turkey
                            Constantinople
                            April 5, 1587.
    Contrary to all expectation, the Spanish mission has got the worst of it, and the English embassy, with five thousand ducats which it has thrust into the jaw of the Hoja of the Sultan, holds the field. Not only have the treaties already drawn up been snatched from the hands of the mission, but last Friday it received instructions from the Sultan that it might depart and that, if its master the King of Spain desired to seek and obtain the friendship of the Sultan, he should send, like other Christian sovereigns, a regular and respectable embassy to the Porte.

132. Elizabeth’s Anger with Davison
                            Middelburg
                            April 9, 1587.
                            background: Drake has sailed
    Mr. Buckhurst came here three days ago to conclude the agreement with the States General of Holland, as the deputies of the States General in England had submitted to Her Majesty that certain articles settled with his Excellency the Earl of Leicester must be agreed to. The chief grievances remedied are those concerning the assembly of so many foreign soldiers and their introduction into Holland without consent of the States General, the pillaging of the open country, trade with neutral districts, and appointment of Count Maurice as High Admiral. It is not thought that the Earl of Leicester will bring so many troops with him as last year. They were mostly good-for-nothing people who roamed the land as beggars. it is believed that he will raise as many men here as he wants. Additional advices from London state that General Davison has been in danger of his life, because without the knowledge and consent of the Queen of England he despatched the sentence of death of the Queen of Scots and affixed the Great Seal to it. Her Majesty is greatly displeased because he did not consult her beforehand and because the Queen of Scots was executed by the common headsman in derogation of her royal blood. Captain Drake is said to have sailed from London with thirty vessels, of which sixteen are the Queen’s and are large and very well found. He has gone westwards, and it is supposed he will lie in wait for the Indian fleet.
    Mr. Buckhurst. See note on 265.

133. Denmark closes the Baltic
                            Cologne
                            May 14, 1587.
    It is announced that the King of Denmark has stopped in the Sound nearly five hundred ships from Holland and Zeeland, as well as from the Baltic and England. Moreover from the English ships he has taken more than a hundred articles and then made them sail to Danzig and other places. This news is confirmed at Amsterdam, with the addition that so much property was taken from the English ships because a few months ago the English garrison at Bergen-op-Zoom took the Danish envoy prisoner.

133. Will Drake be recalled?
                            Antwerp
                            May 16, 1587.
    They write from Brussels that it has been announced at that Court that the Queen of England has had a pinnace made ready for sea in great haste and sent after Drake to tell him to return with all his warships. This because Andrew de Looe has managed so well that it is at last possible to conclude a satisfactory peace. But in letters of the 15th inst. we hear that in Brussels there is no tidings of this pinnace having started from London. So people here do not know what to believe. The story looks like empty talk to confuse people and leave them under a false impression. The best informed opinion here is that Drake has sailed straight to Portugal and Cadiz. A number of warships and fighting men would seem to be assembled there to meet the Indian fleet with its riches and escort it home. So in this direction Drake would have a pleasant reception.

134-36. Drake takes Cadiz
                            Madrid
                            May 30, 1587.
    On the 24th. inst. they wrote from Cadiz how Francis Drake, the English pirate, made a surprise landing there with forty-eight ships great and small, not all warships. He pillaged and stripped about fourteen ships laden with all sorts of merchandise and lying in the roads, and stayed there for some days. Those ships which he could not take with him he afterwards burnt or sank.  Thereupon the chief citizens with women and property fled to Seville and elsewhere, although the King at once sent five hundred men to the fort as garrison, together with some galleys. On the 25th inst. news again came from His Serene Highness the Cardinal Archduke Albert of Austria to the effect that this Drake, after sailing away from Cadiz, first proceeded to Cape St. Vincent and remained there ten days with his fleet, and after the 15th went to the province of Algarvia situated in Portugal, not far from the town of Lagos. There he landed some two thousand men and drew them up in order of battle, as though the enemy were in sight and forced to fight him. With his troops he advanced in battle order to within half a mile of the town of Lagos, whereupon the citizens in great haste ran up on the walls, and the Governor made a sally with three hundred horse. On this Drake slowly retired. Now, although the Governor pursued the marauders with his troopers, neither side attacked or harmed the other. On the following day, that is the 16th, Drake landed again with some troops and appeared before a fortress named Sagres, situated near the town of Lagos. he took it after two assaults, as he had brought with him scaling ladders and other apparatus for attack. Although one hundred and fifty Portuguese soldiers were in the fortress with the monastery and the altars and pictures in the church. The monks fled to safety. Then he came to two castles, from which the garrisons had likewise fled. These also he burnt down and razed. All the cannons, armour and weapons, as also all the wood which he found there, he carried off to his ships. On the 18th he arrived with his fleet off the port of Lisbon, and on the morning of the 19th he passed between the two harbour forts. And although Don Alonzo de Bazan, brother of the Marquis de Santa Cruz, sailed out with the seven galleasses which he commands at Lisbon, he began to skirmish with his cannon, and the firing and skirmishing lasted till six o’clock in the evening. But the firing of the big guns from the enemy’s ships was so severe that the galleasses were ultimately forced to retire, without producing any effect on the English. When the English fleet had also withdrawn a little way in its turn, a few soldiers were sent out to prevent the English from landing. But early on the 20th inst. the English fleet left the river and went out to sea, in what direction is unknown. Thus far the Lisbon letters of May 25. His Sacred Majesty of Spain has slept long enough, and from pride, preoccupation or parsimony has paid no attention to such visitors. But now he has been roused afresh and must hurriedly protect himself with money and troops. The marquis de Santa Cruz is already arming, and money and troops are being sent him in great haste. He is to sail from Lisbon as soon as possible with thirty-two well-armed galleasses and pursue the enemy. As news has been received that Don Antonio of Portugal is to sail from England with another fleet, and it is likewise impossible to know whether he too will not come to Portugal and join Drake and whether one of the fleets or even both may not again make for India, His Sacred Majesty has ordered the Duke of Medina Sidonia to sail out as quickly as possible and pursue the enemy with 32 galleys which are already fitted, and 32 big warships also which are being prepared. With the utmost despatch His Majesty is sending money to Seville in Andalusia and to Biscay, where some large ships are likewise being constructed for war, and to all places where it is required. Troops are being raised all over Spain. Recently also fifteen hundred soldiers, all trusty Spaniards, arrived in Cartagena from Sicily. Another two thousand are expected from Italy. It is said too that men are to be transferred from Germany to Italy as garrisons in place of those who have been brought to Spain.
    There is moreover some fear that the Portuguese might have an understanding with Drake of Don Antonio. Now what will happen over all this time will show. A large sum of money was recently sent for the King from here to Barcelona through some Genoese and Messrs. Fugger of this city. It should have gone to Italy and the Netherlands, but whether much of it will reach the Netherlands and the unhappy troops there we shall hear shortly.
    P.S.—Just this moment His Majesty is sending a Knight of Malta, who is a famous Italian architect, with some workmen to Cadiz, to pull down the old fortress and build up a new one.
footnote: Albert (Albrecht Vii, the Pious), Archduke of Austria, 1559-1621, Governor of the Netherlands. He was married to Isabella Clara Eugenia, Infanta of Spain, daughter of Philip II, 1599-1633. In 1579 he became a Cardinal and lived lo
268. More Troops and Money for the Low Countries
                            Cologne
                            July 16, 1587
    Letters of the 10th inst. from Middelburg report that the Earl of Leicester has arrived there from England. With him in twelve vessels have come the Admiral of England, a Field-Marshal, and also a number of courtiers. Thirty-two companies of soldiers may be expected any day. The Earl of Leicester is said to have brought £30,000 in cash. Two of Drake’s large vessels appear to have reached London. Their Captains had sailed away owing to disputes with Drake. They have been imprisoned. Three of the Queen’s ships, some pinnaces and six big merchantmen are to be sent to Drake from London with all speed.

138-139. Drake at Plymouth with his Spoil
                            Antwerp
                            July 25, 1587
    London letters of the 14th inst. announce that Captain Drake has arrived at Plymouth with four of the Queen’s ships, leaving the rest off Cape St. Vincent or thereabouts. He brings a great ship of four hundred tons or more which came from Portuguese India, laden with pepper and other spices. This ship is valued at a million or over. Still more vessels are being fitted out in England for Drake to sail with, as it is desired he should lie in wait for the Peru fleet. The talk in London is that some one has come to Court bringing peace proposals from the King of Spain.
    Further letters from London allege that the ship brought in by Drake belongs to the King of Spain, and that His Majesty himself had her built in Lisbon after the conquest of Portugal and named the San Philip. This ship took over the cargo of another, the San Lorenzo, from Calicut, as the latter had sprung a leak. This is why her cargo is so valuable. We are told that six hundred and fifty-nine passengers were aboard this vessel, but Drake put them off on the Azores with their baggage. She carried also twenty-two brass guns and a large number of iron ones.
    Letters came yesterday from Lisbon to say that Drake has taken another ten or eleven vessels coming from Brazil. This will be a heavy loss for the merchants. The Portuguese here declare that the San Philip brought for the King four hundred thousand ducats, as a new gold mine has been discovered from which this gold was won.

139. Leicester’s Troops leave Zeeland
                            Antwerp
                            August 1, 1587
    The Earl of Leicester recently brought most of his troops out of Zeeland and embarked them, so that some hundred or more vessels full of soldiers were along the Flanders coast. He intended to put them ashore for the relief of the small town of Sluis, but owing to the vigorous resistance of our forces he failed and sailed back again.
    They write from Hamburg that an envoy from the King of Spain has come to the King of Denmark, and the King of Spain seems to have asked the King of Denmark to negotiate peace with the Queen of England.

139-140. Difficulties over the Division of the Spoil
                            Cologne
                            August 20, 1587
    A report come from Hamburg that the Queen of England has sent three Earls and others to discuss terms of peace with the Prince of Parma. The ships from India, which have not yet been unloaded at Plymouth, are lying there still, as nobody knows how to divide the spoil between the Queen and the freebooters. It is confirmed that quantities of gold, silver and precious stones as well as other things are on board. Some more vessels are being got ready for Drake.
    Robert Cecil and a young Spencer were sent to the Netherlands to prepare for the coming of the negotiators of peace.

140. Settlement of Differences between the States General and the English
                            Antwerp
                            August 22, 1587
    The cargo of the ship from Calicut is being sold in London, and this is no omen for an early peace. The Queen of England has caused obsequies costing over £3000 to be performed for the Queen of Scotland. As the English fear the Prince of Parma will besiege the town of Bergen-op-Zoom, they have garrisoned it strongly, and seem to be pitching a camp there. They have also burnt down two villages which stood too near the town.
    They write from Middelburg that the States General were entertained last Sunday at the Earl of Leicester’s, and have come to an amicable arrangement with him. He is to administer everything, and the States will render full obedience and all aid with troops and money. An order seems also to have been issued forbidding on pain of death any slander of the States General or the English.

140-141. Impressing Crews
                            Cologne
                            September 11, 1587
    Orders have been issued at Middelburg that no ship may sail westwards alone. But eight vessels may sail in concert under escort. Moreover, trade seems to be permitted freely with Spain, though the merchants distrust the Spaniards. They fear confiscation. Permission appears also to have been granted for the import of several kinds of merchandise into Antwerp, only however after payment of the prescribed licence. The ship San Philip has been discharged in England, but her cargo is not yet sold. Horatio Pallavicini is said to have intended to dispose of it. All vessels in London are being detained, but for the most part let go again. This appears to be done merely to get crews, as sixteen Queen’s ships are to go to sea, besides thirty more for Drake.
    Horazio Pallavicini (Sir Horatio Pallavicini), merchant and diplomatist, d. 1600, a scion of the well-known Pallavicini family. His father before him was settled in England and an eminent merchant. Horatio’s business was on a great scale, extending all over the world. He lent money to Elizabeth, Henry IV, and the Low Countries at high rates of interest. Elizabeth was so heavily indebted to him that the fate of the country was often in his hands. In 1587 he was knighted by Elizabeth. At the time of the Armada his services were very great. He tried to persuade Alexander Farnese to instal himself as sovereign of the Netherlands in opposition to Philip II. Elizabeth repeatedly employed him on important diplomatic missions to the continent. His family was related by marriage to that of Cromwell.


141. The Scotch Border
                            Antwerp
                            September 13, 1587
    The rumour is circulating that the King of Scots has burnt some villages and hamlets belonging to the Queen of England. Also that the King of Scots is to marry a Danish Princess. With this object some emissaries of his have arrived in Denmark and have been magnificently received.

141. The Peru Fleet arrives safely
                            Antwerp
                            September 16, 1587
    Urgent letters from Spain of the 4th inst. report that the Marquis de Santa Cruz has arrived with the entire Peru fleet, one hundred and seventeen vessels in all. Moreover two ships from Calicut have reached the Azores in safety. It is hoped that he has by now reached Seville and Lisbon unharmed. The Peru fleet is said to be bringing fourteen millions in gold and silver and over three millions in merchandise. This is indeed a great sum.

141-142. The Peru Fleet arrives safely
                            Madrid
                            October 4, 1587
    The Marquis of Santa Cruz for Scotland
    The fleet from Peru and New Spain has reached San Lucar, with the exception of the three ships which have put in to Lisbon. Three vessels were lost during their entrance to San Lucar, but it is hoped to recover the gold and silver in them. A gentleman of importance appears to have been despatched to Seville by His Majesty, and it is said that, as a contribution to the Armada about to be assembled by His Majesty, he is to levy a tax of five per cent. on everything brought over by this fleet, presumably amounting to seventeen millions. This is a large sum, and will probably come to as much as the fleet has cost. The Marquis is supposed also to aim at effecting some sales and thus making as much money as possible. The Marquis de Santa Cruz seems to have been ordered by His Majesty not to land and not to disembark his men. The Cardinal of Austria went out to meet him with two galleys and has no doubt delivered His Majesty’s command verbally. It is thought certain that, as soon as he is supplied with ships and other requirements, he will sail to Scotland, as the King there is in revolt against the Queen of England. It is announced, too, that His Majesty is sending Vespasian Contaga to the Netherlands because he wants the Prince of Parma to be available for the expedition against England.
    Vespasiano Gonzaga, Duca di Sabionetta, an Italian-born General in Spanish service, 1531-1591.

142-143. Will not Elizabeth break with the United Provinces?
                            Antwerp
                            October 10, 1587
    In letters from London of the 29th ult. received here today it is announced that the Queen has already nominated Commissioners to conduct the peace negotiations. Others again write that nothing has been heard of this. Recent news from Holland is that the Earl of Leicester has parted in high dudgeon from the States General at The Hague and is gone to Dordrecht. He appears to have dismissed from forty to fifty companies of English soldiers and to intend to leave for England. Then the States will have to look after themselves. Count Maurice of Nassau and the Count von Hohenlohe refuse to join Leicester. This has caused great discord in Holland and Zeeland. What His Highness aims at is that the Queen of England should break with the United Provinces, in order that His Highness may all the more quickly reduce them to obedience.

143. Don Antonio at Constantinople
                            Constantinople
                            October 14, 1587
    It is reported that a distinguished Portuguese nobleman, under pretext of searching for prisoners and setting them at liberty, has succeeded in obtaining permission for Don Antonio to come to this place. His intermediaries were two Jews, the Sultan’s best informants, who keep him posted in events all over Christendom. Don Antonio, disguised and incognito, is to journey here from England by Danzig through Poland and Moldavia. The Portuguese has already started to meet him with a Turkish courier, and Don Antonio is to be sent at the cost of the Sultan from here to Cairo and thence through Persian waters to the East Indies, to try his luck there, and if possible to take India away again from the King of Spain. As a vassal of the Porte, he is to send from that country to the harbours of the Sultan all spices and other Indian goods at present exported to Portugal, and is to forward handsome gifts here as tribute every year. The affair has been carried through in the utmost secrecy, and the two Jews and others held council over it one day for hours behind locked doors with the Grand Vizier and the Beglerbey of Greece. Now whether anything will come of this matter time will show.

143-144. Embargo on English Goods at Antwerp
                            Antwerp
                            October 17, 1587
    The King has forbidden entry to all manufactured articles hitherto imported from England, Holland and Zeeland, or brought on ships recently arrived from Hamburg. In future no such commodities may be introduced unless accompanied by certificates of purchase or production in towns or districts within the King’s obedience. Consequently many people producing these commodities have migrated from Holland and Zeeland into Artois, Hainault and Flanders. Three days ago vessels came in here with general cargo, but only by licence. After the expiry of three months no English cloth or article of dress may be sold here. The veto is not yet printed, but will be the day after to-morrow.

144. Don Antonio may be useful, but is he at Constantinople?
                        Constantinople
                        31 October, 1587
    The new Venetian ambassador will be here within four days and the old one leaves a fortnight later. The matter of Don Antonio of Portugal is certainly being pushed forward with vigour, but whether he is already on his way here, as many declare, is unknown. But it is correct that Hassan Pasha is advocating it strongly with the Sultan and Grand Vizier. He is the greatest corsair of them all now, and is to be entrusted with the control of all Barbary. Hassan pasha wants the Sultan not to abandon this enterprise, even if he has to spend his own money on it, or if Don Antonio should display no desire for East India. If the Sultan would pay for it, help could in any case be given to the Portuguese, and Hassan Pasha has promised to see to this himself from Barbary. But whether a gentleman so strongly averse to expenditure will show any alacrity about this remains to be seen.

144. English Soldiers near Bonn lift Electoral Cattle
                            Cologne
                            November 5, 1587
    A week ago English soldiers from Wachtendonk out looting captured and carried off, between here and Bonn, 300 oxen belonging to the Electors of Cologne, Mayence and Treves. They cut down the twenty-five Bonn soldiers convoying the beasts.

145. War Preparations and Suspicions
                            Antwerp
                            November 5, 1587
    As the King of Spain is arming so heavily at Lisbon and Biscay and assembling a powerful fleet, the Queen of England also is arming heavily, for it is considered certain that the King of Spain will send his Armada to Scotland since the King of that country seems to have risen against the Queen of England and to have promised the King of Spain a port for his vessels to take shelter in. Thus an expedition against England may well be undertaken and the peace negotiations have fallen through again. Another strong reason is that the States General of Holland and Zeeland have quarrelled so vehemently with the Earl of Leicester. The States declare that the Queen is trying to come to terms with the King of Spain without their knowledge and consent. This is why the Earl of Leicester wished to occupy the Holland towns with English soldiers, so as to be ready to surrender them with the greater ease. They declare that the Earl of Leicester greatly wished to introduce English soldiers into the city of Leyden, but the Mayor and Corporation would not allow it, so by command of the Earl of Leicester two Captains and a government official were beheaded. It is believed that the States General will conclude a separate peace with the Prince of Parma, but what will come of this is unknown.

145-146. War Preparations and Suspicions
          Delight of the Hollanders at the Departure of the English
                            Antwerp
                            November 21, 1587
    Of the vessels being built here four large ones are already complete and lying in the Scheldt. The rest are being pressed forward and worked at even on holidays, but it is not thought they will be ready before Christmas. Among these ships one is especially powerful, and on the poop in Latin characters is written “Lord Jesus, show me Thy Way!”  This ship is not for use in the river but at sea. Although it was thought that this armament was only directed against England, news has just now come that the Duke of Parma has put up his camp outside the town of Ostend, as the Beggars are also to be feared and the forts along the Scheldt have been filled by the States General with eighteen companies of fresh troops. Three days ago the Hollanders fired many guns from their fleet because their agreement with England is determined and the Earl of Leicester is actually to send his English soldiers home again. It is announced here too that the Earl of Leicester has already arrived at Flushing and the treaty with England is only for defensive purposes.

146. Inducements to be held out to the Turks to join in the War
                            Constantinople
                            November 26, 1587
    The English ambassador has received instructions from His Gracious Queen that he is recalled unexpectedly and, as some asseverate, in disfavour. But the ambassador declares he has himself requested His Gracious Queen’s permission to return home, in order that he may explain the exact state of affairs here by word of mouth, and persuade the Queen to induce the Sultan to support her against the King of Spain with all his power.

146. Santa Cruz beats the English near Ragusa
                            Constantinople
                            November 28, 1587
    On the last day of last month a special courier came from Ragusa bringing definite news that the Marquis de Santa Cruz met the English Armada of forty ships, sank twenty-six and captured the remaining fourteen. It is credibly reported that the Sultan and, as was plainly to be seen, all the Viziers were startled at this, and as timid as though their own fleet had been beaten by the Christians in the Archipelago. They at once sent for the Ragusan envoy, cross-questioned him in open Divan, had his letters translated, and found that the news was confirmed.

147. Turkish Preparations for War
                            Constantinople
                            December 9, 1587
    Ibrahim Pasha is having heavy work executed here in the Arsenal on the pretext that he is to take the sea in person with a large fleet. But those who know, especially those who hold important positions in the Arsenal, consider this impossible. But since the Sultan receives much injury from Christian pirates every day, and the Venetian ambassador and other good Christians encourage him daily, it is rather thought some fifty galleys will move out from here and cruise in the Archipelago and along the Barbary coast. One hundred and fifty small vessels are to sail out and devastate the territory of the King of Spain. But it is thought more likely they will sail merely wherever they can find the most plunder and will try to prevent the King of Spain’s fleet from getting out.

147. Armada Preparations
                            Cologne
                            December 24, 1587
    The presumption in Brussels is that the vessels being pressed forward at Antwerp and other places are to sail next year against England. Four regiments of German mercenaries are to be put on board them. So next spring there will be strange doings enough, since the King of Scots has declared himself the enemy of the Queen of England and probably has an understanding with the King of Spain.

147-54. The Armada must sail and it cannot fail
unknown
unknown
                    background: Address by Cavaliere Fra Tiburtio Spanocchi to the Catholic King on the Expedition against England.
    The wrong inflicted by that corsair Drake upon Spain and thus upon the world at large fills me with longing to see him chastised. Zeal for the service of Your Majesty impels me to compose in this letter a brief address. I implore pardon for my presumption and a kindly recognition of the goodness and honesty of my intentions in submitting my address. Your Majesty will be able to understand from it as a good Prince, Christian and Friend of Peace, why it is so urgent for me to help Your Majesty to guard Your own interests. The preservation of Your possessions is effected by good relations with Your vassals and subjects and by the protection of the colonies and Catholic fortifications upon which those who desire to thwart the plans of Your Majesty have designs. There are countless instances of Princes of antiquity and the present time to prove, if they had occasion, that a powerful King, desirous of maintaining his own, can choose no better way than that of conquest, or, to speak in terms of statecraft, such a King must increase his dominion. The reasons will be the clearer to Your Majesty inasmuch as no other Prince rules over so vast a territory and as the greater portion of Your Majesty’s power consists of moveable articles, such as the Indian fleet in the Colonies, which lies before the fortresses and in the important harbours which it has to defend. These possessions bring to Your Majesty an increase of power. But we now see this corsair in no wise content with disquieting the world. He pillages our storehouses and is unlikely to confine himself to the feats already accomplished. Moreover he will have imitators who will be drawn on by the rich booty and impelled by the malice of neighbouring potentates. I conceive therefore that the best means to the repose of the States of Your Majesty lies in an expedition against England, the country which is so grievously harming our trade with India. From the Levant no danger threatens to hinder this project. Moreover, the neighbours of Spain are so preoccupied with their internal difficulties that they cannot interfere with us. On religious grounds many Princes are on Your Majesty’s side. To His Holiness the Pope and to many other Christian Princes the expedition against England will be especially welcome, more so to His Holiness than to any other Prince. The Pope will support Your Majesty with troops, money and ships and render our victory certain. By the special mercy of heaven Your Majesty, like other Christian Princes, has at the present moment a large number of galleys and galleasses at disposal, sufficient for a powerful army and a great fleet. Indeed, there lie in our harbours so many ships that they would suffice for the subjection of a far greater realm than that of England. Your Majesty has Captains General, soldiers by water and by land, confident of victory and thirsting for war on behalf of Christendom. Moreover Your Majesty is entitled The Catholic King. With You is Justice and it generally brings victory. The right stands upon the side of Your Majesty, for the foe by their misdeeds have caused this war. The soldiers will go into this war gladly and gaily for the sake of the rich booty, and then Spain will become the richest land upon earth. Elizabeth has but few soldiers and no fortifications, for King Henry, her father, forbade them to be built. We know that Cæsar advanced upon Britain with but a few thousand men and horses, but the world was then less thickly populated than now. But let us ignore this when fighting is in question and a fleet fit to guard our possessions must be maintained. The feelings of all men are against England, and never has there been a better cause for war than the increase of our empire by the subjection of England in so short a time and with such great renown. In God’s name let us not fear the dangers of the voyage, but keep before our eyes the vast numbers of our vessels, and tell ourselves that England has not been able to equip more than 40 ships. We must believe withal that she has done her utmost and knows well that the other fleets were no stronger than her own. It is clear also that she has only armed her fleet to rob and to maraud. In all she can gather together but 200 vessels, and craven souls should bear in mind that the greater portion of them are fit for piracy, but unfit to meet our expeditionary force at sea. When one considers the insolence of this Drake in face of our soldiers, he might, relying on our long-suffering and on his own resources, grow even more insolent in future. Some day amid his looting he will fall into our net despite our indecision. The courage of the English at sea is nothing great, for, in the engagement fought by the Marquis de Santa Cruz against the French off the island of St. Michael’s, the English vessels were the first to flee. May Your Majesty unbridle your wrath and confirm thereby the pride of your soldiers and strengthen the valiance of our souls. We are weary of agreements with faithless people or rather with a woman who keeps no law. those men are led on more and more by the bait of the wealth of India. Since a royal expedition cannot be kept a secret it were more fitting, after the fashion of the ancient Romans, to proclaim it by herald, that other princes may be unable to say that we act in secret. The enemy will have to bear great expenditure in money if the necessity is imposed upon him of summoning foreign aid into his dominion. This will bring to pass the entire destruction of his provinces, especially because foreign auxiliaries have often in the past established themselves permanently in those places to which they have been summoned. An example of this is England itself, which derives its name Anglia from the tribes which were once called in to help and then made themselves masters of the whole country. If they call in many troops they will have to face vast expenditure and I know how empty the Queen’s treasury is. I know also the cost of only one single regiment of German mercenaries, and this is the only nation they can make use of, as the French are entirely taken up with internal quarrels. As for the feelings of the people in this case, one can say that this Queen will be even more detested by her own subjects than she now is, as she alone will be the cause of all the troubles they will have to bear. The Queen’s subjects then will open the door to us. those who are now lying quiet but who have suffered most grievously, the Catholics, will, although I do not care to trust them blindly, in all probability make some sort of diversion in our favour.
    There are three methods of getting quit of the enemy, if foreign potentates should make an attempt to annoy Your Majesty from some other quarter. The first method is an expedition by sea, after calling up immense numbers of foreign troops, the second method is the defence of the continent, and the third and least promising method would be to decide for a combination of the first two, as then the land and sea forces would be scattered. If Your Majesty will trust the sea alone, our superior numbers in ships and men will in my opinion ensure certain victory. The goodness of our ships, in this alternative the most important point, will suffice to meet any fleet likely to assemble in those northern waters. Our fleet must be composed as follows:
    60 sailing ships, carrying 300 soldiers apiece. .  .  18,000 men
    25 large galleys built on the Portuguese model, 400 apiece  .  10,000 men
      6 galleasses, carrying 500 men apiece.   .  .  .    3,000 men
    40 galleys, carrying 100 men apiece.   .  .  .  .    4,000 men
    40 pinnaces, carrying   .  .  .  .  .  .    3,000 men
    All of these from Biscay.
    This makes a total of 171 vessels. In addition to the forces above enumerated we require 2000 sappers, and besides these 2000 horses will be of the utmost importance, since in that country they are lacking and the crossing from Spain is long enough to render the introduction of fresh horses difficult. It will be absolutely necessary to bring over from Flanders transport and cavalry which the Netherlands can furnish. As for artillery, munitions and other requirements of war, I presume that Your Majesty can easily give orders to ensure suitable provision.
    In this manner we can confront the enemy’s fleet with our Armada. It will suffice that we meet it with all our force, and it will please God to bless our victory as beseems our good right. We shall thus in a short while sail towards the middle of England, capture the nearest and most convenient harbour and there await the other ships which will be coming from Flanders and Spain. We must keep the sea safe for the galleys and galleasses which move to and fro between Spain and England and provide reinforcements. It is not probable that after the defeat of the English fleet another body of vessels will gather large enough to offer resistance, as the English will naturally have enough to do already and their other allies would have much trouble in equipping an Armada to annoy our own. This might happen if we were not successful at the first onset. If our ships do not reach the shore at an entirely safe harbour, it may be assumed that later on they will find one that is satisfactory and suitable for fortification. There they will build a fortress and with all diligence prepare their defence. It would be wise to advance with our entire army into the enemy’s capital, that is to say London. The sea fight will not be so bloody as not to leave 25,000 soldiers for the purpose. In this case the Captain General will have to proceed according to the condition of his own troops and those of the enemy. If he should find the enemy brave, and this seems to me an overbold assumption, since large populations which for many years have had no sudden invasion to meet are readily discouraged, they will certainly have no man of valour and decision. As an example, I adduce the Sack of Rome, carried out by the Bourbon, and the famous capture of Antwerp in our own times and of many other towns as well which had no such powerful armies at disposal as the above named. We must remember, too, the anguish of mind of the inhabitants of great towns which could not otherwise be taken by force of arms. But if the enemy should be resolved to defend their country themselves, they lack the strength and will be unable to prevent our troops from landing. An army with the qualities of the Spanish will moreover be a match for any opponent. therefore, if your Majesty’s sagacious Captain General understands his advantage as I have said, he will at once undertake the voyage, and the Queen of England has no India at her call to replace the cost.
    As the result of all considerations I can expect naught else than that your Gracious Majesty will take the honourable decision to declare war. It suffices to set foot on the enemy’s territory. As things stand to-day, for the repose of our people and the glory of Your Majesty, no settlement of our differences is possible. We cannot declare war under better or more desirable conditions, and even the harshest peace concluded after our army stands on foreign soil will be attributed to the kindness and clemency of Your Majesty. the vassals of Your Majesty great and small await with the utmost eagerness the opportunity of proving to Your Majesty their courage and their strength. This war will prove itself a good school for the young nobles who are growing soft in the dangerous leisure of the Court and of their own houses. Your Majesty will commend their rapidity of decision. Apart from the advantages which our empire will drive from it, the profits are so obvious as to outweigh the costs of the war. The English vex us to sorely, they impair our authority in so many quarters, that it is better to make war upon the enemy than to employ other remedies. France is so preoccupied with its civil war that it cannot check our expedition. It cannot scatter its forces either. It is difficult too to believe that for the advantage of others France will shed its vassals’ blood and lavish its funds. We know how hard it comes to the King to maintain himself with his own forces, and he can of a surety not help England. In consideration of the sagacity and military experience of our Captain General and the valour of the veteran soldiers in Your Majesty’s army, France will take good care not to interrupt our voyage or to meddle with our dispute.
    The timid will perhaps mention the Turk, but he is so menaced by Persians and Tartars that he is not in a position to occupy Christian fortresses. If with all his forces he proceeds against Malta he will meet so stout a defence that he will retire with loss. The Princes of Italy will unite against the common foe of Your Majesty, and they are so well provided with munitions and ships that there is in that sea no possibility of Your Majesty being disturbed in your expedition to chastise that Queen who has given such good cause for her chastisement.
    We are assured of the help of the Virgin Mary, and of Germany so grievously harried by the heretics. They have no reason for helping England, as they cannot suspect Your Majesty of designing at this moment to make yourself master of England. To conclude. The whole enterprise lies in the hands of God. Your Majesty has the right on your side and must decide one thing or the other. Be the result commended to God as on other occasions, and may He grant His Divine assistance to this Your Majesty’s enterprise.
    Rome was suddenly taken and sacked by an Imperial army under Charles, Duke of Bourbon, ex-Constable of France, in May 1527.
    In 1585, Antwerp was captured by the Duke of Parma after a long siege.

154. More Ships captured by the English
                            Antwerp
                            January 2, 1588
    His Highness continues to have much work done here on flat-bottomed boats and other war-vessels, but the destination of the expedition is still unknown. There is again silence about the English commissioners who were supposed to be coming over, and their non-appearance is thought to be the Duke of Parma’s fault for not yet signing their passports. This is caused by the Queen of England’s delay in despatching her commissioners. From Middelburg comes the announcement that the English have taken fifteen ships bound from Brazil to Lisbon and laden with sugar and other goods. They are said to have been worth two hundred thousand ducats. The Portuguese here are just now talking about them.

154. The Armada to sail in the Spring
                            Antwerp
                            January 23, 1588
    Letters from Lisbon of December 16 have been received here this week reporting that the Armada there is ready and that twenty thousand men are awaiting embarkation. It is, however, not supposed that they will sail before the spring. The English with thirty-five warships are lying off Cape St. Vincent not far from Lisbon, awaiting vessels which move to and fro and carrying off what they can. They are said to have done much damage to Algarvia by robbery and theft. The Armada takes no protective measures, and people wonder whether it does not intend to attack the English unexpectedly.

155. Peace Negotiations and Conscription
                            Antwerp
                            January 30, 1588
    An English emissary to the Duke of Parma arrived at Ghent last Sunday and requested His Highness to select a place of meeting for peace negotiations. The English leave the choice to His Highness. On our side the peace commissioners appear to be Count von Arenberg, Monsieur de Champagney and Councillor Richardot. It is thought that the meeting will take place here. This English commissioner is said to have left again for England on the 26th, and it is hoped that the English commissioners will be here by the end of next week. We received London letters of the 16th inst. this week stating that the commissioners are certain to come over, and are only awaiting the return of the emissary before definitely embarking. Nevertheless the Queen of England is still arming vigorously and equipping a large number of warships. It is also reported that in addition to soldiers 4500 sailors have been recruited. Drake is to put them on fifty or sixty war-vessels and sail to Spain with them, though his precise destination is unknown. A curious form of peace negotiation!  Moreover, the Queen of England has called up and inscribed the whole male population, and all her harbours along the coast are garrisoned and warships in the ports near Scotland and Ireland are ready for sea, so that the Spanish Armada cannot get into England. Altogether she is handling maritime affairs with great boldness.
    Letters from Lisbon of the 17th ult. reveal that many vessels from Hamburg have arrived there safely with all sorts of merchandise. Of the twenty ships from Brazil only fifteen have got in, as the remainder were captured by English pirates. As for the Armada of the King of Spain at Lisbon, nothing is said about when it will sail or where to, but, as the English in Spanish waters will be so strong, both fleets bound for India are in serious danger, and this may gradually ruin trade in Portugal and Spain.

156. The Turks continue to arm
                            Constantinople
                            February 15, 1588
    Ibrahim Pasha continues his preparations for putting to sea next May with two hundred galleys. All necessary orders for the purpose have been issued, especially those concerning the galley-slaves. But I have reliable information and have reported already that hardly more than forty galleys or fifty at the utmost will be able to leave. it is possible that Ibrahim pasha is not going himself and that he will have to entrust the guardianship of the Archipelago to somebody else, but he tells every one he is going and that he is absolutely determined to bring in the Maltese or Florentine galleys or die in the attempt. And this is to be merely the beginning of his campaigns, for the following year with three hundred galleys he is going to try something really great. However, this is not altogether believed. Anyway in that case the Maltese and Florentines would be unable to sail so far into the Sultan’s dominions, if they could not take shelter in Venetian harbours. I fancy the Turks will proceed to Candia first, and this naturally causes the Venetian ambassador here no small anxiety. Owing to Ibrahim Pasha’s campaign the Venetians will take countermeasures with seventy or eighty galleys and will assemble about two hundred well-armed vessels at Corfu.

156-157. The Turks continue to arm
                            Constantinople
                            March 15, 1588
                            background: The French Ambassador behaves ill
    As for the equipment of the galleys it is still being pushed on, but as regards Ibrahim Pasha it is thought that he will not be allowed away himself, or at any rate not farther than the Archipelago. I have been secretly informed that the Sultan has recently endeavoured to find out in confidence from his Hoja whether he was doing right in granting the request of Ibrahim Pasha for an expedition to Barbary. The Hoja gave as its opinion that the Sultan would be ill-advised at the present moment to entrust to so untried and inexperienced an Admiral such a large number of galleys for so important an undertaking. To guard the Archipelago it would suffice for the Sultan to send out under another Commander a few galleys in addition to the ordinary fleet, and to protect navigation from here to Alexandria and other Turkish places from the Christian pirates. This advice was acceptable to the Sultan, who was anyway unwilling to let Ibrahim Pasha depart. But it is still uncertain what decision the Sultan will make when further pressed by Ibrahim Pasha. In the meanwhile the Arsenal is hard at work and all necessary preparations are being made for forty or fifty galleys to put out. The English Embassy urges Ibrahim Pasha all day and every day to go himself, and the ambassador has given up the journey home through Poland which he was to have made by order of his Queen. They say he is to stay here another year. The Frenchman still continues his bestial behaviour, and is hated and cursed by every one he has to do with. He shouts and cheers, as I have already related, over the victory of his King, and declares that by this success he has freed his whole kingdom of Huguenots and heretics. I fear, however, that he is somewhat short of this. The French envoy says also that, so long as the English Queen has a representative here, the French King may as well spare himself a special ambassador, as the Englishman works hard to intrigue against and injure Christendom and especially the most venerable House of Austria. The French apparently have orders to the same effect. May God overthrow and utterly destroy both of them, and in particular those who, as one might well expect of them, allow themselves to be used for so shameful an end. All true-hearted Christians will desire this for them in order that they may not attain their most harmful and poisonous object.

157-158. Peace Negotiations must fail
                            Antwerp
                            April 2, 1588
    Little has been heard this week about war affairs or peace negotiations. Nevertheless it is believed that an arrangement has been arrived at to render real negotiations possible. The English commissioners, however, seem not to be very anxious for this unless the Duke of Parma makes up his mind to yield on the two points submitted by the commissioners to His Highness, that firstly all foreign troops of any kind whatsoever be dismissed from these countries, and secondly that freedom of conscience be granted there. Now, as His Highness on behalf of the King of Spain will not give way on these points, it is doubtless unnecessary to enter upon negotiations for peace.

159. More Peace Rumours
                            Antwerp
                            April 9, 1588
    Letters from London of the 25th inst. [sic] reached here this week. They recount that the Queen of England is making every preparation, since the Armada of the King of Spain proves to be so powerful and is apparently intended to attack England. Accordingly she has ordered ten thousand men to be recruited in London and provided with firearms and defensive weapons. The like is being done in all towns of the realm, to defend the country on the frontiers and in the harbours. The Queen is having many war-vessels equipped daily, and Captain Drake is said to be lying ready in the port of Plymouth with sixty warships. But we are not told whether he is to sail. We must therefore suppose that he will lie in this harbour to see if the Spanish Armada comes to England or not. Karl Taxis received letters this day of the 8th inst. from Bruges, relating that on the evening of the 7th His Highness arrived safely at Bruges with the English doctor, and that His Highness will wait there for all the other English commissioners from Ostend. It is thought certain that they will come there to congratulate His Highness and to determine whether they are to proceed to Ghent or Antwerp to negotiate peace.

158-160. Jollity at the Hague
                            Antwerp
                            April 23, 1588
    I wrote from Middelburg on the 14th inst., informing you that the Hollanders and Zeelanders were sending some of their emissaries to join the commissioners of the Queen of England at Ostend. There are eight of them. As I was leaving Middelburg by boat at midday on the 16th inst., these emissaries were already there, travelling to Ostend. On the boat by which I sailed were several people from Holland, who told me that last Palm Sunday, the 10th inst., there was great gladness and rejoicing at the Hague in Holland among the nobility and notables because the English governor at Bergen-op-Zoom in the name of the Queen of England has settled all questions touching Holland in peace and amity. Count Maurice of Nassau gave a banquet and the Lord above mentioned gave a brilliant feast at which joy and high spirits were supreme. Count von Holloch at this banquet tried for a jest to bend his rapier into a hoop right round his body, but it broke and wounded his arm in two places. All questions in Holland are settled and the entire country is under the protection of the Queen of England. On the 21st inst. the English commissioners and the Prince of Parma welcomed each other with much pomp, embraced and exchanged compliments in the open field and beneath the blue sky at Oudenburg between Ostend and Bruges. On this spot the discussion of peace is to take place. Many tents have been pitched there, and to-morrow the Prince of Parma is having a magnificent banquet prepared for which eight cooks have been sent over from here. The Prince of Parma has sent the commissioners vehicles laden with all sorts of delicacies, such as pasties, game, fresh fish, Rhenish wine and other things unprocurable on the sea coast and hereabouts. When this welcoming and banqueting is over we shall learn whether the peace negotiations make any further progress or not. A good result is hoped for here. May the Almighty grant it!  It is high time!
    Up till now the English commissioners have been negotiating with the prince of Parma about hostages. The Prince tried to propose to them for the purpose Count Egmont, Monsieur de la Motte, and Messieurs Champagney and Richardot, but the Englishmen refused, since they require people of equal rank with themselves. However, they announce themselves content with the old Count von Mansfeld, the Duke of Aerschote, the Count von Arenberg, and Monsieur Montigny.
    Charles, Count von Arenberg, 1550-1616. He was entrusted with diplomatic missions under Don John of Austria, took part in the siege of Antwerp under Alexander Farnese, and, during the period of the expedition projected against England by Philip II in which Alexander Farnese had important employment, was chosen to act as Governor of the Netherlands. He participated subsequently in the peace negotiations between the Low Countries, Spain and England. He is alleged to have been implicated in the conspiracy of Cobham and Raleigh against James VI.
    François de la Grange de Montigny, Marshal of France, 1556-1617, fought against the Spaniards in the army of Henry IV, was in command of the light cavalry, and Governor of Metz and Verdun.
Peter Ernest, Count, later Prince, von Mansfeld, 1517-1604, Spanish General in the Netherlands and Captain General of Luxemburg. He fought first against the Huguenots, then against the rebels in the Netherlands, of which he was repeatedly Captain General. After the death of Farnese he was Captain General till the arrival of Archduke Ernest, and was made Prince in 1594.

160-161. Municipal Food Control
                            Antwerp 
                            May 7, 1588
                            background: See Fugger News-Letter (First Series), Letter 84, The Armada ready for Sea.
    A week ago the talk amongst other things was of a banquet which passed off amid much rejoicing. But there is here much food for thought, as the English commissioners have now been in the country six weeks without our hearing with any definiteness whatever whether any matters have been discussed or arranged or decided at all. Some think this a good sign, others the contrary. May the Almighty grant that peace ensue!
    The report comes here from England that the whole country there is alert and expectant of war, because of the great war Armada which is to come from Spain. In France a harbour is stated to have been assigned to the fleet which put out from Lisbon on march 25. All provisions are now at quite reasonable prices, but corn grows cheaper daily as the city has taken over great quantities from the dealers and the ordinary man has no money. At noon to-day they were saying on Change that the Queen of England wishes to have the towns of Calais and Boulogne again. The King of Spain is to fight the French for them.
    

161. The Prince of Parma and the English Commissioners
                            Antwerp
                            May 21, 1588
    There is little good news to report about the negotiations for peace, as the Queen of England through her commissioners insists on the removal from these countries of all foreign soldiery after the conclusion of peace, Spaniards, Italians and Germans, and on freedom being granted to the Reformed religion in Holland and Zeeland. The Prince of Parma, because of His Sacred Majesty the King of Spain, will not and cannot grant this. Yesterday evening some Italians on business with the Court of Parma reported here that the Prince of Parma had caused the English commissioner with whom he had for some days been negotiating peace to be removed from Bruges. He had him informed that he should tell the other commissioners that if they had no further orders from their Queen they might as well go home. On hearing this the English commissioners have arrived at Ostend. Nevertheless it is said that the Prince of Parma has sent an express despatch to Spain and expects an answer back in twenty days. In the meanwhile the English are to stay at Ostend.

161-162. A Far Cry from Constantinople
                            Constantinople
                            May 27, 1588
    The English embassy is still here. It was ready to start a year of two ago and confidently hoped to accompany Ibrahim Pasha’s fleet against the King of Spain as far as Gallipoli and then to journey home through Adrianople and Poland. I gather that its journey will not be begun till next month, and even then with but little satisfaction. From a person of confidence, who is in close relationship with the English embassy, I hear that it has given up its journey, because Polish affairs are still doubtful and the passage through Poland remains unsafe. They look forward also to the arrival of an important Polish embassy here and in England, so that they could then make the journey with a small retinue.
    The English ambassador is ready to go home from here through Danzig, and leaves his secretary behind till the arrival of a fresh embassy.

162. English Trade in the Elbe
                            Hamburg
                            June 13, 1588
    To-day comes news that the English have arrived on the Elbe with over thirty ships. But they have anchored at Freiburg, a large village on the Holstein side twelve miles from here. It seems as though they wished to ascertain what arrangement they can make with Hamburg before approaching nearer. Before closing this letter I happen to meet one of the eight chamberlains, who informs me of the circumstances regarding these English vessels. There are twenty-nine merchantmen and seven warships. The Admiral had orders from the Queen to suggest to the Hamburgers that they should permit the unloading of these ships at Staden, and if they would not do this in friendship and of good will then he was to carry it through by force and stake his existence upon it. The Queen would then attack the Hamburgers by land and water wherever and however she could get at them. The Queen writes herself to the authorities, and the despatch has this day been read out to the Council. She insists on the vessels remaining this time at Staden. If the Hamburgers could subsequently arrange with the English to grant them the same privileges as the inhabitants of Staden, she would, if the latter do not object, make no difficulties. But the city of Hamburg will suffer, and it must again leave all its ships at home. This is really a very high-handed action on the part of the English in a river belonging to the Empire.

163. Hans Limburger sees the Armada at Sea
                            Hamburg
                            July 2, 1588
    I simply must tell you that the skipper, Hans Limburger, has arrived here with his vessel from Cadiz. He broke through the embargo, and has a cargo of salt, wine, raisins, cinnamon, and a little sugar. He put out from there on the 20th ult., O.S., and passed Lisbon on the 24th. In the distance he saw the Spanish Armada and sailed abreast of it all day. The next day it was blowing rather hard and he could not see it. He is of opinion that the Armada put out on the 23rd of May Old Style or the 2nd of June New Style and was shaping a course for the Channel. The skipper met an English warship on his way and this brought him into Plymouth, to Drake’s Armada. He was entertained by Drake for three days and the English were rejoicing that the Spanish Armada was at sea. Afterwards Captain Drake gave the skipper a permit, so that he might be allowed to pass, and quickly formed in order and put to sea in spite of a contrary wind. If an action is fought, there will be terrible loss of life. On two consecutive days here the sun and moon have been quite bloody. What this signifies the merciful God alone knows. May de defend the Right!
                    Postscript.
    Letters have just come from Cologne reporting that the Prince of Parma has news that the Armada sailed from Lisbon on the 30th May. God grant it all prosperity!

163. The Pope is in alliance with Spain
                            Rome
                            June 25, 1588
                            background: See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 85, Excommunication of Elizabeth.
    The Pope recently signified to one of the Cardinals that he was in alliance with the King of Spain. He intended to grant him a million crowns in aid, so soon as news reached him that the Spanish Armada had disembarked its men in England.

164. Impressment of Foreign Sailors
                            Constantinople
                            June 29, 1588
    The Moldavians and Wallachians brought in their annual tribute lately; likewise the Ragusans. The last mentioned were for a while in great danger and anxiety because of the English embassy. It accused the Ragusans in writing to the Sultan through his Hoja and the Grand Vizier of being disloyal subjects of the Sultan and traitors to their master. For they had sent over sixty large ships with their crews to help the King of Spain against the Queen of England. The English embassy demanded punishment for this and a stern order for the recall of the ships and ships’ companies. The Ragusans had the greatest difficulty in excusing themselves to the Sultan Ibrahim and the Hoja and in exculpating themselves on the ground that these ships had been detained not deliberately but, as is customary among Christian potentates, forcibly, and to the detriment of those concerned and contrary to their desire. In the King’s Armada there are thus many Venetian, French and other foreign vessels which have been detained and used.
    The above-mentioned English embassy is still ready to start from here to Poland, and has depicted the majesty and power of their Queen to the natives in such a manner that the great men here and the common people as well do not know how to praise this Queen at all in proportion to her merits. They say that the English lack nothing to make the sound Mussulmans, and need only stretch out a finger to become one with the Turks in outward appearance, in religious observance and in their whole character.
    The longer the French man is here the more he is disliked in the place. At the moment all the Viziers are against him, and only the Sultan’s Hoja is keeping the church at San Francisco closed to oblige him.

164-165. Rumoured Defeat of the Armada
                            Antwerp
                            July 2, 1588
    This afternoon news came from Bruges that His Highness the Prince of Parma has received information from Calais that the Spanish and English Armadas have met on the English coast and the Spanish Armada has been beaten. No details are reported.

165. The Armada has joined the Prince of Parma
                            Rome
                            July 9, 1588.
    A courier from Turin brings news that they have heard there from Spain that the Spanish Armada has embarked six thousand sappers from Galicia and Biscay. The Spaniards here state that the fleet passed the English Channel on the 6th of July and is said to have joined the ships and army of the Prince of Parma.

165. Perhaps the Armada will not sail
                            Antwerp
                            July 11, 1588.
    Letters from England of the 28th ult. have announced that the Queen of England’s fleet put out under Captain Drake one hundred and forty sail strong, as it had been learnt that the Spanish Armada had also sailed and had been seen at sea. But in London letters of the 4th inst. this does not appear. It is thought that the Spanish Armada is near Lisbon. Therefore the Queen has commanded the Admiral, who is in port at Boulogne, not to put out with the fleet but to await further orders. From this some conclude there will be peace in the Netherlands. From Morocco it is reported that the King there has a strong force in the field to help the Turks in their siege of the fortress of Oran. If this should be the case it would ill suit Spain and there would be grave doubts about the sailing of the Armada.
    Besides this we hear from England that Martin Schenk is still there asking for money. He hopes to get some.

165-166. The Armada has been destroyed in a Storm
                            Middelburg
                            July 22, 1588
    Five ships from Lisbon have reached Calais bringing salt and spices. I got this news after closing my last letter, and the rumour was then circulating that these ships had brought tidings that the Armada of the King of Spain had been utterly destroyed and annihilated. These ships would seem to have met a portion of the Armada which had got back to Lisbon. But, as the news reached here so quickly and unexpectedly, little credence was placed in it, and I did not care to write anything to you about it. Since then, however, the English mail has come in bringing many letters, and in them it is stated that a vessel has arrived from Lisbon announcing that it twice met ships of the King’s Armada. The first time twelve, the second time seventeen very badly mauled. And when this vessel asked the Spaniards what had become of the rest of the Armada, it received the answer that they did not know, as they had parted company in a storm. The storm had come on so quickly and so unexpectedly that they had had no time to anchor. But what really happened is unknown. The storm seems not to have lasted more than an hour.
    Drake and the Admiral of England are still at sea; how they have fared we know not, but we hope to hear from them soon, as the wind from England is favourable now. This news only reached here yesterday and more is eagerly awaited. Some suppose that Drake too was in this storm.

166. It has sailed home because of Plague
                            Prague
                            July 26, 1588
    It is rumoured here that the Spanish Armada has sailed back to Lisbon because plague has broken out on board. The English are said to have sailed after them. But where this news comes from I cannot find out.

166-167. Anxiety to hear of the Success of the Armada
                            Constantinople
                            July 28, 1588
    Despatches arrived here recently from the Queen of England touching the recall of her embassy, and they were delivered to all Viziers a week ago. At present it is supposed that this embassy will not be allowed to depart before there is some definite news about the Spanish Armada and its accomplishments. People here are inclined to wonder what the Sultan thinks about the new friendship with this Queen and about her offers. It is to be hoped that the will of God is no other than that justice should take its course, and that she should meet the fate she deserves from the King of Spain when his plan has succeeded. We are waiting for this here every day. The embassy is ready to start and proposes to go home from here through Poland and by Danzig. The English embassy received the required permission through the Hoja of the Sultan, and, as is customary, took leave of the Sultan on the 24th inst. From now on it may, as announced, start for Danzig through Poland any day.
    On the 25th inst. the French ambassador despatched his cousin to France with all speed, no doubt on account of the news which had come about occurrences in Paris between the King and the Guises. There is much talk here on the subject, and it is asserted that the Guise is already virtually King of France and the other is totally deprived of power.
    This may mean May 11, 1588, the so-called Day of Barricades, on which the heads of the League stirred up a rising in Paris against King Henry III, in such a way as apparently to increase the power of the League to an immense extent.

167. Peace Negotiations continue slowly
                            Antwerp
                            July 30, 1588
    As for the peace negotiations, a kind friend who is attending them writes to me that the English commissioners have despatched their Dr. Dale to the Duke of parma at Bruges, to report on them. This Doctor was very well received, and on the 18th inst. very courteously sent on to Bornhem. He was, moreover, presented by His Highness with a very fine and magnificently caparisoned horse. Now, when this Doctor had again reached Bornhem, the English despatched one of their number to England to furnish a report on their deliberations to the Queen and to obtain her approval. Her decision is now awaited. In the meanwhile the commissioners of both sides meet, but negotiations are suspended.

168. The Pope must raise Money for Spain
                            Rome
                            July 30, 1588
    The Council of the Roman people assembled on Tuesday and debated how to raise the money to enable the Pope to meet his engagement to make a contribution to the King of Spain for his expedition against England.

168-169. Hans Buttber’s Account of the Armada
                            Hamburg
                            August 4, 1588
    Hans Buttber has arrived off the town in a big ship. He comes through the Channel from San Lucar. He was with Captain Drake for four or five days and joined the Englishman on the 21st, O.S., of last month, just after the latter had had an engagement with the Spanish Armada. From the 21st to the 26th they had skirmished and fired heavily at each other, but they could not board, and the English with their little ships sailed so well and manœuvred so skilfully, firing meanwhile, that the galleasses could not get at them. Drake captured Don Pedro de Valdez, Admiral of fourteen vessels, and had him and ten other nobles brought on to his own ship. He gave them a banquet and treated them very handsomely and entertained them besides with trumpets and music. On this ship he took sixty guns and made four hundred and fifty men prisoners. Moreover, he got yet another ship which caught fire of itself. All this happened in presence of the skipper. On the 26th he received a pass, but only on condition of carrying a letter to another English port. There 28 Queen’s ships were lying. As soon as their Admiral read the document he got ready for sea to join Drake, but sent two yachts to Holland and Zeeland to tell them to keep a sharp look-out there and prevent the Dunkirk people from coming out.
    This noon there comes from Holland a vessel which was at Enkhuizen actually on the last day of July. It brings news that eighteen ships of the Spanish Armada were sunk by gunfire, and eight taken and brought to England. The rest of the Spanish Armada has fled to the French coast. If this is true it will somewhat abate Spanish insolence and give the English fresh courage, though they have no lack of insolence either.

169. Armada beaten, English in pursuit
                            Hamburg
                            August 5, 1588
    It is reported that the English Armada has beaten the Spanish and taken twenty-two ships and sunk eighteen by gunfire. Many vessels have been burnt. Some two hundred Counts, or Dons as they call them, together with the young Santa Cruz, have been taken prisoners to England. Moreover, the Admiral and Vice-Admiral with two other large ships, each of almost six hundred tons, have been brought in to Zeeland. Two galleasses seem to have been destroyed, the remainder are still at sea.
    At Dunkirk a great dispute over the Armada has arisen between the Marquis de Renti, Governor of Hainault and Admiral-at-sea, and an Italian Marquis. They quarrelled so furiously that the Italian called Renti a traitor. So they had recourse to their weapons, and the Marquis received four bad wounds and the Italian is gravely injured and will hardly escape with his life. Captain Drake seems also to have been shot and badly injured. The English are pursuing the remains of the Spanish Armada. The Duke of Parma was unable to get out of Dunkirk with his fleet, and cut down four or five Captains with his own hand because they would not support him at the right moment. The upshot is that the activities of the Holy League are greatly limited and the English will do great damage at sea by rapine and theft. God dispose all for the best!

169-170. The Armada back at Corunna. No great damage
                            Venice
                            August 12, 1588
    Letters from Spain and Madrid of the 20th ult. report that all the ships of the Spanish Armada which had been dispersed by gales at sea returned to Corunna on the 13th ult. without having suffered any particular damage, but some vessels which, owing to storms, had to go as far as England were pillaged by fisher-boats. A very malignant sickness prevails on the Armada. So the General, Duke Medina Sidonia, is disembarking the sick and replacing them with healthy men. Consequently there has been a great concourse of people from all directions, as the intention is to renew the expedition against England as soon as possible.

170-173. Wholesale Destruction in the North Sea
                            Middelburg
                            August 12, 1588
    The Spanish Armada so long talked about has now at last appeared, but seemingly to its undoing. Firstly, on the 5th inst. a despatch pinnace arrived from England with orders that the Zeelanders and Hollanders should keep themselves in readiness on all coasts and particularly not let the Duke of Parma and his Armada get out of Dunkirk. The English meant to do their best against the Spanish Armada. This pinnace also brought the report that the Armada had been seen off the English coast and that it intended to invade England in force. At that time the English Armada was assembled in one place, and the Spaniards could not sail in because the English always had the wind in their favour, and the Spaniards perpetually got the powder smoke from the English ships in their eyes. On the 6th inst. came two more pinnaces from England with orders to keep firm hold of the Prince of Parma and his fleet. They also brought news that twenty-two Spanish ships had been sunk, and the Vice-Admiral, together with all the distinguished nobles who had taken refuge from other ships, had been brought to England. So they have driven the Spanish Armada between Dover and Calais and in the meanwhile examined the Vice-Admiral. He is said to have admitted that the object was England. The intention was to get as far as Dover and Calais and occupy the English there, while the Prince of Parma was to have invaded England at some other point. He was supposed to be supporting the Spaniards with his force of 70,000 men. On the 11th inst. another pinnace came from England with orders that the Prince of Parma was on no account to be let out and all ships ready for sea were to be sent to England. The pinnace also reported that both fleets had fought bravely for eight hours between Dover and Calais and that at the end the English had given chase to ten Spanish ships. Of these some were driven ashore and promptly wrecked, but most of them were brought to England. So, having fared thus badly, the majority of the Spanish Armada assembled in the Straits of Dover and hoped for aid from the Prince of Parma. On the 10th inst. the English again attacked the Spaniards afresh with all their forces and damaged them severely. The Spaniards were obliged to flee into the North Sea, but the English continued their pursuit. This night the Prince of Parma tried to put out from Dunkirk, as the Spanish Armada had been seen to flee from there. Four large well-found ships came out first, but, bless your heart, our ships played with them as a cat with a mouse, caught them at once and sank all four. The Spanish ships are lying up and down the coast like birds without wings. The English fire without intermission and shoot away sails, masts, stays and all rigging off the ships, so that they are unmanageable. Whenever they drive the Spanish ships ashore they are lost. On the 11th inst. our boats’ crews got two big ships, one called the San Philippo of more than 1200 tons, the other the San Matheo of the same size, both galliots. The one they got off Blankenberghe, the other near Dunkirk. Off one ship most of the nobles seem to have escaped to Nieuport, not far from Dunkirk. Our men hope to get hold of more of these ships. The sea is driving ashore near Flushing much artillery and wreckage from the burnt ships as well as burnt corpses, so that it is a horrible sight. In Flushing there are heaps of captured Spaniards. They say the Prince of Parma has betrayed them, for the Spanish Armada went thus far up the country relying on his promises, and hoping to receive great assistance from him. Indeed they were of opinion that he would accomplish more than the Armada, for he had always promised them to come out with 500 sail and be a match for the English alone. He was going to make the invasion with 70,000 men, but now he is bringing woe and misery on all the splendid Spanish ships. They curse him horribly, and it is to be feared he will fall into complete disfavour with the King and be recalled from the Netherlands. Altogether the wretched devils here do nothing but complain. Our sailors wanted to kill all the Spaniards because they would not surrender. Their ships are built as high as churches. But we took pity upon them. The seamen who brought in the ships above mentioned numbered 150 in all. They marched through the town at noon in procession two abreast with all the Spaniards’ best clothes on. In costume one looked like a Portuguese, another like a Spaniard, a third like a Biscayan, a fourth like an Italian. People here thought they were prisoners from the Armada, because of the many expensive costumes. In the two ships there was plenty of booty, about 120 brass guns, many of iron and a quantity of provisions.
    A vessel has also arrived at Flushing from Calais with the report that Duke Medina Sidonia and de San Lucar, in command of the Spanish Armada, has been brought in there. Half his head seems to have been shot off. They say he was the most powerful man in all Spain. The Spanish Armada has had a terrible time of it. A Scotchman has come in here also. He saw the Spanish Armada in the distance on the North Sea and says it is barely over 80 vessels strong and the English are after it with 250 and firing heavily with a favourable wind. The Spaniards have had no rest day or night for sixteen to eighteen days.
    We shall hear more yet. So much has happened in the last for weeks that very little has been said about trade. At every place in the country men have been standing to arms in case they should be wanted. It is hoped the Prince of Parma will at length be wearied out, although the commissioners are still sitting so that one might expect some very wonderful result. I leave it at that. Time will perhaps bring more strange events, and the war may move to yet other places. The English will not quiet down all at once, for they now have 500 to 600 well-found ships at disposal and might do wonders with them. Perhaps they will pay a visit to Spain and Portugal, as these two countries are very bare of ships and guns. The Spanish Armada brought with it many galleys too, among them two quite big ones from Italy. They had hoped to get them over here, but they hung in the sea and were swamped. So with them also the Spaniards had no luck. Many things have occurred also that I do not know about. The English actually lost three or four large ships. The biggest, the Elizabeth, was burnt in the fight, and it is said that with all these fires the sea was as bright and clear by night as by day. The glare could be plainly seen from the land here, along the coast where the wrecked ships and dead men lie driven hither by the wind. It would be well were God’s will done and an end made, but I fear that the war will go on still longer.

173. The Pope regrets the Armada is back at Corunna
                            Rome
                            August 13, 1588
    Last Sunday the Spanish ambassador in residence here informed the Pope that owing to storms at sea the Spanish Armada had reassembled and on the 16th ult. was still lying in the harbour of Corunna. It has lost eleven vessels, large and small, and this the Pope was evidently very sorry to hear.

173. Prizes in English Harbours
                            London
                            August 14, 1588
    Twelve ships of the Spanish Armada have been brought to Plymouth; among them is the ship of the Vice-Admiral.. In the Thames water, which flows from the sea towards London, lie another twenty captured ships. Others also have been carried into different harbours in England, among them four more of the largest ships, so that altogether 36 ships have been brought to this country.

174. Philip II’s Gout is much worse
                            Venice
                            August 19, 1588
    The fault for the Spanish Armada having suffered damage in a storm at sea lies at the door of General Medina Sidonia. He withdrew into the port of Corunna with only four ships, and issued orders for the return of the pinnaces and other vessels. But we learn subsequently by letters from Spain of the 30th ult. that this Armada turned again towards England on the 23rd July. Although His Majesty of Spain was already suffering greatly from gout, his pains redoubled when he heard news how greatly the Spanish Armada had suffered in the storm and how it was somewhat hindered in its operations.

174. No Papal Favours till the Armada succeeds
                            Rome
                            August 20, 1588
                            background: Eduardo Farnese was a son of Alexander I Farnese, Duke of Parma, 1564-1592. Eduardo was made Cardinal in 1591, and died 1626.
    The Pope has signified that Don Eduardo Farnese, whose elevation to the Cardinalate is so strongly urged by the King of Spain, shall be made a Cardinal so soon as the Pope receives news that the Spanish Armada has landed troops in England.

174. No Audiences at the Escorial
                            Venice
                            August 23, 1588
    The Spaniards have received letters from Madrid of the 28th ult. and announce that His Majesty of Spain is at the Escorial, and is giving no audiences, as is His Majesty’s custom when he has important matters to consider.

174-175. Rome hears the Armada has beaten the English
                            Rome
                            August 27, 1588
                            background: John Francis Morosini, Cardinal and Bishop of Brescia, Papal Legate in France, 1537-1596.
    Last Monday a printed sheet was published here, describing how the English fleet was beaten by the Spaniards. This is confirmed by a messenger from the Duke of Savoy also, and Cardinal Morosini writes to the same effect. But the Pope and some Cardinals are still doubtful, and the Pope has said that he will not hand over the promised million to the King of Spain and make Eduard Farnese a Cardinal until the Spanish Armada has disembarked troops in England.

175. Prague rejoices over the Success of the Armada
                            Prague
                            August 30, 1588
    Yesterday evening a messenger came here from Milan with the announcement that the Spanish Armada has fought the English and the English have succumbed. At this the rejoicing here is universal. But whether it is correct we shall not know for certain till the regular mail comes.

175. The Armada in the North of England
                            Antwerp
                            September 3, 1588
    We had letters this evening from London in England dated the 28th ult. with the report that the Spanish Armada is at an island in the North of England. The King of Scots has forbidden delivery to the Spaniards of food or munitions on pain of death. Captain Drake is said to be despatching 180 sail to pursue the Spanish Armada.

175-176. Prague gives details of the Spanish Victory
                            Prague
                            September 8, 1588
    We have received a special messenger with news that the English and Spanish Armadas have met and the English tried to escape to land, but Duke Medina, Spanish General in command, stopped this. He attacked and defeated the English and took 60 vessels small and large. Among them was the English Admiral. The remainder of the English ships together with Drake escaped. Duke Medina sailed into the port of Plymouth, where he landed 8000 soldiers and 30 large guns. Then he went to join the Prince of Parma, and in company with him will try his luck in England further.

176. Liberation of Mohammedan Prisoners by France
                            Lyons
                            September 11, 1588
    A hundred Turks and Moors who had been at the oars in a Spanish galleass were here recently. Our King had caused them to be brought here with an archer from Calais at his own expense and sent them from here to Marseilles by water. From there they sail at the King’s expense to Constantinople. The King had sent a request to the Grand Turk to liberate the same number of Christian captives in return. So the French King has more compassion on the Turks than on the Spaniards.

176-178. Illusory Peace Negotiations
unknown
unknown
                    background: Extract from the negotiations held at Bruges, sent to Spain before the departure of the two Armadas.
Demands made by the envoys of the Queen of England.
    1. She wishes to be informed how far the King of Spain has given the Prince of
         Parma full authority to act.
    Answer:  This will be seen to.
    2. The Queen requires that all arms be laid down and that an armistice ensue.
    Answer:  It has been said often enough that this cannot be done.
    3. All treaties between the Crowns of Spain and England will be renewed and
         thereby all fortresses and cities will be returned to their former owners.
    Answer:  If peace results this will be done.
    4. All foreign troops must leave the country.
    Answer:  His Majesty cannot do this, as all his neighbours are armed.
    5. England demands free trade.
    Answer:  This point offers no difficulties, since Spain sincerely desires peace.
    6. The Queen requires that the alliance which she formerly had with the Kingdom
         of Portugal should remain in force.
    Answer:  His Sacred Majesty is not less favourably disposed to the Queen of 
           England than His Majesty’s predecessors, and desires to maintain peace
           and concord with England.
    7. The Queen demands freedom of religion and conscience.
    Answer:  The King does not consider that the Queen has the right to issue orders 
            to him within his own territories any more or any less than the King has
            the right to command her in her dominions.
    8. The Inquisition is not to be set up within these countries.
    Answer:  His Majesty does not intend this to be done nor does he desire it for the
            future.
    9. The Queen requires that all Governors be natives of these countries.
    Answer:  The King cannot be forbidden to place in office whom he will.
    10. All money expended upon this war must be made good.
    Answer:  The King says that these debts have not been incurred at his desire, and
            that His Majesty has far better right to require that the money and
            expenses caused him by this war be repaid to him.
    11. The Queen is ready to return to the King all fortresses and districts which she
           has occupied.
    Answer:  This would be no more than honest, as His Majesty has been illegally
            deprived of them.
    12. The Queen is ready to help the King with all her forces to recover his land.
    Answer:  More detailed explanation is required as to what this signifies and by 
           what means the Queen proposes to do this.
    13. The Queen desires to know what security is to be given her that this treaty 
           will be observed.
    Answer:  No other security can be given to the Queen than the signatures of the
           King and of His Highness the Duke of Parma. The same has been given
           to other Provinces and towns and they have been satisfied.

178. Lack of Powder prevents Pursuit
                            Staden
                            September 22, 1588
We recently informed you that the Spanish Armada had invaded Scotland. This was incorrect. They did indeed land in order to procure fresh water and then sailed back to Lisbon. From lack of powder and munitions the English were unable to pursue the Spaniards further, but sailed back to England. Else they would have been able to do the Spanish Armada much harm, because the wind was foul for it. About the losses of the two fleets nothing is yet known. It is thought certain that the Admiral with Drake as Vice-Admiral and 80 of the largest and best ships will sail to Lisbon and Spain in order to intercept the remainder of the Armada before it gets home. But they might have their trip for nothing. Some Jesuits and women found among the Armada prisoners have been hanged in London. In addition they were hanged an Englishman sent as a spy by the Prince of Parma. We are also told that there is an old gentlemen of 84 among the prisoners. He was apparently among those sent by the Prince of Parma to negotiate peace, and is said to have written to the Queen not to fit out a navy for fear of endangering the peace. He is imprisoned as a traitor, but what will be done with him is unknown. Several more such people may be found yet.

178. Philip sick of a Fever
                            Venice
                            September 24, 1588
    Spanish letters from Madrid of the 3rd inst. announce that the King is sick of a fever at the Escorial. His Majesty has not appeared in public for some days, having received news that his Armada has been rather badly mauled by the English and by heavy winds.

179. Leicester dead. Drake comes home
                            Middelburg
                            September 29, 1588
                            background: Sir James Croft (d. 1591) was imprisoned for treason under Mary, released on her accession by Elizabeth, suspected of intrigue with Mary of Guise in 1560, made a Privy Councillor in 1570, was one of the commissioners in the trial of Mary Queen of Scots, and in 1588 was sent to arrange peace with the Duke of Parma. For his treachery on this occasion he was sent to the Tower.
    The latest English letters of the 17th inst. report that an English skipper has come in to say for certain that the Spanish Armada has sailed with a favourable wind round Ireland to Spain. There seem to have been from 60 to 70 vessels. On the journey home crews and ships may have suffered further loss. This we shall perhaps hear in the next letters from Lisbon.
    This letter from London reports also that the Earl of Leicester has died two days’ journey away from London. He was on a trip to a watering place presumably for the improvement of his health. The Queen of England is greatly distressed at his death.
    James Croft, one of the English peace commissioners in the Netherlands, has been imprisoned in London. He has admitted having assented to certain proposals with the Prince of Parma without the previous knowledge of his colleagues, notably to handing over Flushing and Briel. The English have stopped 15 or 16 vessels trying to sail from Lisbon to Hamburg.
    A fresh letter just from London brings news that Captain Drake with his entire fleet has returned to England, being unable to stay at sea any longer because of the gales. He is disembarking his crews and paying them off.

179-180. Constantinople still incredulous
                            Constantinople
                            October 7, 1588.
                            background: Maximilian III, Archduke of Austria, son of the Emperor Maximilian II, 1558-1620. In 1587 he was elected King of Poland, but in the battle of Bitschin he lost his crown to the rival king, Sigismund of Sweden. During the engagement he was taken prisoner, but liberated in 1588 on renunciation of the throne. He subsequently fought with success against the Turks and ruled Alsace for a period. On the death of Rudolph II he renounced the Imperial Crown in favour of Archduke Ferdinand, who afterwards became Emperor Ferdinand II.
    People here and the Sultan quite especially are greatly irritated at the absence of the grand Polish embassy which they have so long been looking forward to. Also from the reports of the merchants who come here daily they are strongly of the opinion that the Poles have proved false and treacherous to the Turks and have a secret understanding with the Emperor and other Christian potentates to do people here all possible harm when opportunity offers. But most of all it is believed that they intend to accept Archduke Maximilian as King. When the Beglerbey of Greece returned home recently from a visit to the Sultan, he spoke of the Poles with great anger and disgust, called them lying hounds and threatened that for their treachery to him, the Beglerbey, they should be punished as they deserved. Immediately afterwards several agents were sent to Transylvania, Moldavia and Wallachia to learn about the movements of the Poles. As far as can be learnt from a secret and reliable source this has all been brought about by the Englishman, who visits all Viziers and dignitaries in person, and tells them that the navy of his Queen has defeated the Spanish Armada, captured most of it and killed the Spaniards. On the top of this lie he tells yet another. Assembled with His Majesty at Prague he declares are now almost all the chief Christian potentates, but in particular grand embassies from His Holiness the Pope, the King of Spain, the Muscovite, and the Poles, as well as all the Austrian Archdukes, in order to make Archduke Maximilian King of Poland and also to form a powerful alliance against all their foes, but against the Porte here in particular. The French and Venetian ambassadors are said to have declared that they know nothing definite about the Armada. But it is reported that news has already been received here in print assigning the victory to the Spanish Armada. But it is added that no decisive battle has taken place. This is expected every day.

181. Spanish Wrecks in Ireland
                            Antwerp
                            October 22, 1588
                            background: See Fugger News-Letter (First Series), Letter 92, End of the Armada.
    Several letters arrived here from London by Zeeland on the 17th inst., announcing that of the 80 ships of the Spanish Armada still remaining 34 of the biggest were driven ashore in Ireland by bad weather and a south-westerly gale. Where the rest have escaped to is not yet known. So when these vessels anchored on the Irish coast in a miserable state without masts and rudders, the gentlemen on board sent a boat to the Governor of Ireland to beg him to allow them on land to recover and to purchase necessities and also to repair their badly damaged vessels. This was granted, and the gentlemen with many of their men stayed ashore for some days and passed to and fro to their ships. They even presumed to throw up an entrenchment along the sea. But as soon as this was bruited abroad the people flew to arms and slaughtered all the Spaniards they could catch on land. However the most important were kept prisoners, and fourteen grandees, among them the Duke of Medina Sidonia, were hourly expected in London as captives. They overpowered the vessels and took or threw into the sea all on board. It is said, though, that the Duke of Medina Sidonia is not among these, but has escaped to Spain. The Queen has despatched Captain Norris to Zeeland with 4000 men.

181-182. Rome ceases to pray for Success this year
                            Rome
                            October 29, 1588
    In St. James’s Church here the Spanish Nation held intercession for the success of the Spanish Armada day and night for forty hours, but stopped last week, because, as the Spaniards assert, great numbers of this Armada have arrived at Biscay and sailed on to Lisbon. So this time evidently the Spaniards have had no success against England. Nevertheless they have learnt all about this dangerous voyage and have tested the defence of the English, so that next year on their return they will know better what to do and how to carry out their designs upon England.

182. Philip II refuses to see Medina Sidonia
                            Antwerp
                            November 5, 1588
                            background: See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 93, Mourning prohibited in Spain.
    This evening we received letters from Spain of the 5th ult. They are said to state that Duke Medina Sidonia arrived with 40-50 vessels at Corunna in Galicia, and wanted to go to Court at once and see His Majesty. But he was forbidden, and ordered to go home, as His Majesty had no desire to speak to him. Whether more vessels have reached other ports is not mentioned.

182. Don Antonio in England
                            Middelburg
                            November 10, 1588
    King Don Antonio is in England and hopes that on his petition something will be done for him next spring. His youngest son has been sent to the King of Barbary as hostage or surety. This King is to assist Don Antonio with 300,000 ducats. The same assistance is to be afforded him by England, and many freebooters are said to have offered him their services already. So in the summer an expedition of some sort may be made against Portugal.

182. An alleged Traitor
                            Venice
                            November 15, 1588
    They write from Naples that the Master of the Spanish Ordnance has been condemned to be torn asunder by four galleys for sending a boat full of powder and other munitions to the Queen of England on pretext of forwarding it to Spain.

182. A Plot at Lisbon
                            Antwerp
                            November 19, 1588
    Letters from Lisbon of the 10th ult. state that some important persons in league with Don Antonio have been imprisoned and executed.

183. Marine Stores from the Baltic declared Contraband of War by the Queen
                            Antwerp
                            November 19, 1588
    The Queen of England is busy fitting out 200 ships to pay a visit to Portugal. Captain Drake and certain other English gentlemen are at sea with 40 ships. Don Antonio, the exiled King of Portugal, is getting ready in Barbary with 100 ships which the King of Barbary is furnishing for the aid of the Queen of England.
    Yesterday letters of the 28th ult., N.S., reached here from London from the Alderman of the Stalhof there, Zimmermann by name, addressed to such of the Baltic merchants as are here present to inform them that by command of the Queen from next year, 1589, onwards no things serviceable for the equipment of ships such as wood, tow, pitch, tar, flax, hemp, cordage, anchors and so on may be exported from the Baltic to Spain. Failing observance she will know what to do with the ships.

183. Philip wants Calais as a Base for next year
                            Venice
                            November 25, 1588
    The Spaniards here state that the King is summoning to Spain the Prince of Parma from the Netherlands and Prince Doria from Italy, in order to consult with t6hem about the prosecution next year of the expedition against England and the war in the Netherlands. He may also appoint another General at sea and on the mainland. Some here think that the King of France might possibly cede Calais to the King of Spain so that the Spanish fleet might shelter there in case of need.

183-184. Spaniards volunteer to build a new Armada
                            Rome
                            November 26, 1588
    The Spaniards here announce that the most important places in Spain have offered His Sacred Majesty to build a new Armada of 200 ships and to pay fifty thousand men for it during two years, in order that the expedition against England may continue without interruption. Stores of all kinds are already being purchased here, and at Biscay some ships are being built on English lines, short and broad. His Majesty of Spain has summoned all Grandees of the realm, and the command of the new Armada is to be entrusted to Don Fernando de Toledo, natural son of the late Duke of Alva.

184. Miserable Plight of Spaniards in Ireland
                            Antwerp
                            December 3, 1588
    London letters of the 23rd ult. announce that the Spaniards who landed in savage Ireland with nine ships were beaten and their leaders taken prisoner. Another galleon has reached Plymouth with not more than for people aboard in the most miserable state. The English have met at sea and defeated the Vice-Admiral of Dunkirk with ten vessels. They have brought the Admiral prisoner to England. The other vessels fled to France. In London some 80 warships are said to be getting ready for Don Antonio, and the Hollanders are to give him another 40 at the request of the Queen.

184. The Queen celebrates a Reign of Thirty Years at St. Paul’s
                            Middelburg
                            December 6, 1588
    The 27th November was a holiday in London because on this day Her Majesty completed a reign of thirty years. On the 28th this Queen seems to have been at St. Paul’s Cathedral, where with great pomp and solemnity a public sermon was preached to thank God for victory over the Queen’s enemies. It was also commanded that the Almighty Vanquisher of the enemy should be thanked in like fashion with prayer all over the country and in all churches. The preparations for King Don Antonio are only going on slowly. They appear to be waiting for Barbary to send the money and for Holland and Zeeland to make up their minds.
185. Hamburg thinks the English Blockade will be run
                            Cologne
                            December 15, 1588
    Letters from Hamburg definitely state that the Queen of England has forbidden that town and other seaports likewise, after the last day of December, to export, either to Spain or Portugal, grain, munitions or anything of use for the equipment of ships, on pain of confiscation of the vessel wherever it may be found. But Hamburg adds that it is believed these voyages will not entirely cease, as there are people who for large profits will sail all the same, and will shape a course to the far North.

185. Services of Thanksgiving for Victory
                            Antwerp
                            December 24, 1588
    Letters of the 18th inst. from England announce that during that week in all London churches great services of thanksgiving were held for delivery from the tyrannous projects of the Spaniards against England and against the Queen in particular. Like Pharaoh, the King of Spain has been punished. During these thanksgivings the Queen seemed very magnificent and devout.

185. Turkish Help for England against Spain
                            Constantinople
                            January 3, 1589
    The English ambassador recently handed the Sultan a document requesting him to equip 100 ships to hinder the projects of the King of Spain against the Queen of England. The Englishman declares that he has obtained the Sultan’s consent, and has therefore despatched a special messenger by Poland and Danzig to convey the encouraging news to his Queen. The Sultan will equip himself to support the Queen against the King of Spain as required. The Sultan is supposed to have said that he will sail with this fleet in person. The Englishman seems also to have gained the approval of Hassan Pasha to his sending representatives on to England to behold the Power of his Queen by land and by water and to report on it here.

186. Philip II said to have abdicated
                            Strasburg
                            January 17, 1589
    The Spaniard is said to have handed over crown and sceptre to his youthful Prince out of depression, for His Majesty wishes no longer to take the responsibility of government seeing the manifold ill fortune that has befallen him. This may well entail unusual changes. What next occurs I will report to you, sir, as soon as possible. May God the Lord grant us all prosperity.

186. James VI, having married a Protestant, will succeed Elizabeth
                            Cologne
                            January 26, 1589
    Letters have come here from Hamburg reporting that both Ladies of Denmark are married, one to the King of Scots, the other to a son of Duke Julius of Brunswick. Upon this the Queen of England has declared that she appoints the King of Scots successor to the throne on her death.

186. Spanish Fears of Invasion by Don Antonio
                            Rome
                            February 11, 1589
    We hear from Naples that that kingdom, in addition to the recently announced one million two hundred thousand crowns, has decided to send as much again this year to assist the King of Spain. It is hoped by this to give a good example to the Duchy of Milan. His Majesty is said to have summoned Mr. Vespasian Gonzaga so as to make use of him in Portugal. His Majesty is making all preparations possible against an invasion of Portugal by Don Antonio supported by the Queen of England.

186-187. An English Fleet will soon take the Sea
                            Cologne
                            February 23, 1589
    News comes to Zeeland that two ships from Barbary have put in there on board of which is an envoy of the King of Fez intending to reside in England. Don Antonio’s envoy has come also. We hear that the English fleet is to sail at the end of this month or by the middle of March, when wind and weather are favourable. On this fleet are to be 20,000 fighting men. This will cause an evil summer. It is supposed they will proceed to India. Many again think that France will support England.
    
    Muley Hamed, 1578-1603, was King of Fez.
187. More Foreign Sailors impressed
                            Hamburg
                            March 16, 1589
    The Spanish fleet has not yet come in, perhaps owing to the great danger caused by the English corsairs who already have 80 vessels at sea. The Queen commands that there be no trade with Spain for six months. Any one who despite this falls into her hands will have his hair plucked. They have already taken some ships from Spain into London and are doing the same every day. The ships are half-stripped, then entirely unloaded, and the cargo confiscated. Then they take the ships and use them in the war, not caring whether they come from friend or foe. The hamburges, Danzigers, Lübeckers carried in there all have to serve. It is a very dangerous game.

187-188. Spanish Ships being swept off the Sea
                            Middelburg
                            March 9, 1589
    The rumour is circulating that eight vessels from Danzig have been lost in a storm along the English coast. One was looted by the English at Plymouth and a fair sum in cash found on it. Along the west coast of England Spanish ships are brought in daily by the English freebooters. The Hamburg and Danzig vessels brought into Dover were unloaded. The new wheat on board fetched a reasonable sum, but the damp grain went dirt cheap or at any rate at a low figure. The owners do not get much of it. Some gunners who were aboard these ships have been taken to London, and there they, just like the unladen ships, will have to serve in the English fleet. This latter is being strongly armed and 30,000 men are said to be on board. At a certain spot they are to be joined by 10,000 Barbary horsemen, so that Seville and Portugal will have to keep a sharp look-out. The English fleet is still waiting for more men from Holland. Then it will soon sail. England and Scotland are very quiet. The Parliaments are assembled and are said to have voted a large tax.

188. France, Navarre, Poland, Sweden, Barbary and Morocco to join England against the Holy League
                            Brussels
                            March 16, 1589
    It is announced from England that envoys of the Kings of France, Navarre, Poland, Sweden, Barbary and Morocco have arrived to form an alliance against the Holy League. To all appearances nothing can come of this but a great and destructive war. It is confidently asserted that Don Antonio has been in Barbary with forty warships and has fetched these envoys. He seems to have been very courteously received by the King of Morocco, who expressed his readiness to favour the cause of the Queen of England. To oblige Her Majesty he will send an auxiliary force of 30,000 Moors, and furnish all supplies of food and munitions from his own country. All English vessels may get what they require in Barbary and put in there to recuperate.
    It is said that this fleet will set out about 200 sail strong with the first favourable wind. There are stated to be ten to twelve thousand Englishmen and eight to ten companies of Hollander Lancers on board. It is pitiable that so much Christian blood should be shed and not against the hereditary foe.

188-189. Philip II revives
Venice
March 17, 1589
    In the Arsenal at Constantinople no war galleys have yet taken the water, but by the spring, that is by the middle or end of April, sixty galleys besides the ordinary guardships should be ready. They will proceed to Barbary. But some are confident that the Queen of England is strongly urging the Grand Turk to use this fleet against the King of Spain, and he is quite capable of doing it.
    In letters from Spain of the 4th of February we are informed of the good health of the King, the Prince and the Princess. His Majesty is gratified to hear of the grant of eight millions of ducats which His Majesty’s subjects have offered, in case he should desire further to continue the war against England, but for the present this is not expected.

189. France threatens the Pope
                            Venice
                            April 7, 1589
    When the King of France signified to the Pope that in case he were molested by members of the League he would of necessity be compelled to accept the aid of the Protestant Princes and of England and abandon Metz to the Princes and Boulogne to the Queen of England, the Pope announced that he would abandon the projects of the League.

189. Arrest of an elderly English Spy in Rome
                            Rome
                            April 15, 1589
    During the last few days the Holy Office here arrested a man of sixty. He is accused of being domiciled here at the instance of the Queen of England.

189. Deportation of Portuguese Nobles
                            Antwerp
                            April 22, 1589
    The Portuguese hear from Lyons that the King of Spain has commanded the whole of the Portuguese nobility to come from Portugal to Castile at once. This is a sign that His Majesty is indisposed to trust the Portuguese nobles, and fears that they will afford assistance to Don Antonio if he comes to Portugal with his fleet and lands there. His Majesty is also sending many troops on horse and on foot every day to Portugal, to offer suitable resistance to Don Antonio.

190. Arrest of English and French by the Turks
                            Genoa
                            May 1, 1589
    Our news here is that on April 28 a ship arrived from Barbary. Its Captain is an Englishman by name Thomas Hunt. He reports that by order of the Grand Turk all Frenchmen in Algiers have been arrested and their property confiscated. The same thing has happened in Syria and in Cairo.

190. Danzig still tries to trade with Spain
                            Warsaw, Poland
                            May 3, 1589
    News comes here that the Queen of England has again written to the authorities of Danzig that they must cease their voyages to Spain yet awhile. This is their warning, and the Queen is not to blame if harm comes to them. Nevertheless the Danzigers are getting ten ships ready with miscellaneous cargoes to send off to Lisbon. God protect them from harm, for last year seven well-found ships sailing from Spain to Danzig were lost on the English coast.

190-191. Reported Defeat of the English off Cape St. Vincent
                            Antwerp
                            May 13, 1589
    We hear this week from London in letters of the 29th ult. that the English fleet has not yet started. But it will be under way with 35,000 men on the first favourable wind. The English have brought in a rich vessel coming from Spanish India. On board were 1200 arobas of cochineal and much gold and silver. It is supposed to be worth about £50,000. This is bad news for the trader. They also write from London that the Earl of Arundel, who conspired with the Queen of Scots against the Queen in England and has been two years in prison, is condemned to death. The character of the English is such that one can well believe this of them. News came in recently from Brussels that the forty English warships, which went lately to Spain and have been for some time off Cape St. Vincent, have been beaten by the Spaniards and have lost fifteen ships.

191. Drake at Corunna
                            unknown
                            unknown
                            background: See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 100, Raid on Corunna.
    On Tuesday the 4th of May at 10 o’clock in the morning Drake appeared with the enemy’s fleet 102 sail strong. They came into the harbour from the sea before a favourable wind without any resistance, and laid themselves alongside Santiago, so far from the town as to be out of range. At 2 o’clock in the afternoon they anchored and put many pikemen ashore, so as to be able to disembark troops. At one spot 500 soldiers were put ashore, at another three companies, with three or four field-pieces, of which they made good use. At another place they disembarked three or four companies, and near Santa Lucia 500 men, 300 musketeers and 200 pikeman. Nearer Corunna they landed over 1000 men. These plundered all the villages near Corunna and burnt down the houses. On the Tuesday aforesaid and on Friday at 4 P.M. Count de Altamira came with some troops, but not in time to do any good. When the enemy saw the great concourse of people, he began at about 9 o’clock a heavy musketry fire on those from the town who were at the town gate. At night the enemy hurled themselves on to the fishing fleet and by 2 o’clock in the morning had taken it. Any one who could not buy his freedom was taken captive. The remainder were killed. This kept Drake busy till Saturday morning. On the same day many troops came up from Santiago and other forts, over 2400 men, under command of a Portuguese Captain. He passed close by the town gate, but his troops fled at once and not a single man remained. On Sunday and Monday 20,000 men should have come to relieve the town of Corunna, but a messenger has just come from Corunna to say that the relief force is not yet there, but that they are expected any moment and the town of Corunna has defended itself bravely.

192-193. Drake at Lisbon
                            Madrid
                            June 10, 1589
                            background: Gomez Suarez of the Cordua family was made Duke of Feria by Philip II in 1567.
    In our last letters we recounted how the English, after retiring from Corunna, put troops ashore at Peniche in Portugal. As it could offer no resistance, this hamlet surrendered to Don Antonio, who received it graciously and treated it with great considerateness. Then he passed further inland towards Lisbon without meeting any resistance, because the Portuguese all remained inactive and would not use their arms against Don Antonio. When he saw this, he took 10,000 to 12,000 men and marched straight upon Lisbon, and the ships followed him as far as Cascæs. So, on the last day of last month, he arrived half a mile off at Fuente de Alcantara, which is a suburb. When the Cardinal perceived this, he sent the Spaniards, about 2500 of them, four regiments of Portuguese and a few horsemen, to meet the enemy and stop him. But when they came outside the town and the Portuguese were required to fight, it was discovered that they had no stomach for it. So the Count de Fuentes retired again on the town with the Spaniards and Portuguese, in order to prevent the population from declaring for Don Antonio. Thus the English advanced to the suburb, and on the 1st inst. to the wall of the town. There they established themselves. They treated the Portuguese well and did them no harm. The town was completely held by the Spaniards and, to facilitate defence, women and children and other useless folk were put on shore across the river. The English thought to get into the town by Santa Catharina. They attacked twice but were thrown back by the Spaniards with a loss of 300 men and 30 or 40 prisoners. On their retreat, as they were passing over a hill, they were fired upon with heavy guns and much damage was done. The Duke of Braganza has marched to Lisbon on foot with 600 men, and many troops are coming there daily. From Castile extra help is coming with all speed. But when the enemy heard this he retreated on the 5th. On that same day the Duke of Feria was due with 1500 men and some cavalry, as also twenty companies of Spaniards and some more troops besides. So the English moved off in great haste and the cavalry pursued, in order to hamper their embarkation. We hope to hear every hour that further damage has been inflicted on them. It is believed that Don Antonio relied greatly on the Portuguese, because they would not fight against him. A Portuguese nobleman, they are called hidalgos, was caught trying to bring Don Antonio 15,000 ducats. He was executed together with a baptized Moor. This Moor, at the instance of Don Antonio, was supposed to shoot the Count de Fuentes, but he fired at the wrong man and hit him in the arm. He was hanged.
    In their five days’ skirmishing before Lisbon the English are said to have lost some 1000 men. It is doubtful whether their provisions will not run out, so that they will be forced to go home, especially as in Santander and other places ships are getting ready to resist them. The galleys are expected from Italy. Of the Moors we hear nothing at all. They seem, thank God, to be quiet.

193. The English retire from Cascæs
                            Seville
                            June 28, 1589
    News came this week by special messenger that the English Armada sailed away from Cascæs on the 18th inst. suffering from famine, dysentery and plague. They are said to have eaten their own horses. Two thousand Portuguese and 150 monks and priests were with them, but they refused to take them along and left them ashore. These Portuguese will soon be hanged, and it is to be hoped that half the fleet will die, so that it may not be able to come back here over soon. In the meanwhile all the fortresses are being equipped, and two galleasses with 1500 soldiers and five ships more from Sicily and many weapons and fighting men have come in too.

194. Have the English really taken Lisbon?
                            Middelburg
                            June 29, 1589
    Yesterday a boat came over here from Dover to say that the English Armada is lying in the river off Lisbon and that the English have taken Lisbon. The English merchants are betting three sovereigns to one that this news is true. I do not feel sure about it. The boat came with a foul wind. When the wind is fair we shall soon hear more details. I hope to get news soon. Twenty vessels are going from here to the fleet again with men and provisions.

194. Philip tries to raise Money in Italy
                            Genoa
                            July 9, 1589
    The Spanish envoy has done nothing towards obtaining the two millions in Florence that his King wanted to borrow there. With this money the troops should have been carried to Spain and Portugal. To the requests of the Spanish envoy the Grand Duke of Florence answered that he now had no reserve of money, and had already given the King more than his income amounted to. But as his galleys had gone out into the Levant to loot, he hoped that on their return they would bring so much that he would be able to afford assistance to the King with it, and the Pope and the Genoese would help him likewise.

194. Sixty Monks hanged in Lisbon
                            Rome
                            July 15, 1589
    Many weapons are said to have been found in a monastery at Lisbon. So about 60 monks have been hanged there. One of them was the Chamberlain of the Viceroy. They had an understanding with Don Antonio.

194-195. Dysentery in the English Fleet
                            Middelburg
                            July 25, 1589
    This week letters were received from England saying that the English fleet had come back again because the heat was so great and the soldiers are too much fruit. It was delightfully cool to eat, but as the soldiers were so heated it gave them their death. So half the ships’ complements died, and they were compelled to come home. But an important English commander is said to be still at sea waiting for the Indian fleet.

195. The Queen said to be dead
                            Antwerp
                            July 29, 1589
    The day before yesterday news came over here from Zeeland that the Queen of England is said to be dead. But nothing is mentioned as to when or whether she was previously ill. So it is not much believed. But it would cause great changes in England.

195. German Mercenaries
                            Cologne
                            August 15, 1589
    News comes from England that Signor Horatio Pallavicini has journeyed to Hamburg and Germany with an emissary of the new King of France. He has with him a sum of money from the Queen of England to recruit German troopers. Her Majesty is said to have promised the King of France to place at his disposal a few thousand men at her own expense.

195. The Queen alive and issuing Letters of Marque
                            Antwerp
                            August 19, 1589
    During this week they have been saying the Queen of England was dead and asserting she had died of plague, but yesterday letters of the 9th inst. came from London which do not mention that the Queen has been ill. So it seems to have been only a rumour. But they do write from England that some warships are again being fitted out, and that the Queen intends to issue letters of marque, so that all ships of whatever origin bound for Spain or Portugal can be captured. Perhaps this is what the warships are being got ready for. The Queen had better be careful not to bring more enemies about her ears than she has already.

196-197. English Prisoners’ Account of the Plans of Don Antonio
unknown
unknown
background: Undated statement of English prisoners about their fleet.
    They say that they set out from Plymouth with 220 sail on April 13, 1589. Among them were five Queen’s galleons and sixteen other large ships, and other ships of all sorts from 112 to 280 tons, also five galleys with seven benches on each side. They took ship 20,000 men strong and were provisioned for two months. Of this they had consumed fifteen days in Plymouth harbour before they could get away.
    The prisoners state further that the Queen made the following arrangement with Don Antonio:
    First of all she granted him for his voyage to Portugal 220 ships, on board of which were 15,000 soldiers and 5000 sailors. Don Antonio pledged himself to reduce all Portugal to obedience one week after the arrival of the Armada. For this purpose he had with him letters from the chief people in the kingdom. Don Antonio asserted that he would meet with no resistance in Lisbon and that he would get more troops to help him gain his kingdom. He signed the following engagements:
    Two months after arrival in Lisbon he is to pay Her Majesty five millions in gold for the expenses of the Armada; moreover, he pledges himself as a token of good friendship to deliver in London yearly 300,000 ducats. The English are to enjoy safe and unimpeded entry by sea to Portugal and Portuguese India; the same obtaining for the Portuguese in England, and both sides are to maintain good friendship. When the Queen equips an Armada at Lisbon against Spain, Don Antonio is to give assistance. All castles and fortresses throughout Portugal are to be permanently occupied by English soldiers at the cost of Don Antonio. Perpetual peace is concluded between the two kingdoms, and they are to assist each other on all occasions.
    All bishoprics and archbishoprics are to be filled by English Catholics. Don Antonio declared that when he arrived at Lisbon with the troops he would give twelve months’ pay and three more as reward. Also he would allow twelve days’ looting, only they must inflict no wrong on any member of the Portuguese nation whether high or low. Also churches and ecclesiastical property must not be injured or anything taken out of them. Everything must be paid for in cash. These were the Queen’s commands, signed in London.

197. Papal Thanksgivings
                            Rome
                            September 9, 1589
    Seeing that Portugal is now safe from the English fleet, the Pope with the whole College of Cardinals went yesterday in procession on foot to the Spanish Church of Minerva and there sang and recited all manner of psalms and sermons of praise and thanksgiving. Afterwards he did the same in the Portuguese church of San Antonio.

197. Five Ships reach Spain in safety
                            Madrid
                            September 22, 1589
    On the 15th inst., praise be to God, there came safely into Lisbon the five vessels expected from India, to wit: San Cristophoro, Santa Maria, Nostra Señora de la Concepcion, San Antonio and Santa Cruz. They started from the Azores on August 5, but owing to foul winds had to put back again. For greater safety three hundred well-armed veteran soldiers were taken on board, as they had learnt that thirty English and other corsair ships were on their way to the Azores, to lie in wait for them. May God grant the same good fortune in future!

197. Henry IV at Paris
                            Middelburg
                            November 9, 1589
    The only news we have is that the King of Navarre with a very strong force marched to Paris on the 23rd ult., and gave orders that a portion of his troops should pursue those of the League. The King has left the Scotch behind in Dieppe as garrison, the other English troops have marched with him.

198. A further Appeal to the Turks for Help
                            Rome
                            November 18, 1589
    They say that an envoy of the Queen of England has started from near here by sea to Constantinople to obtain help against the Catholics in France. On the arrival of this envoy the Grand Turk has accordingly given orders in several localities, but especially in Chios, that all efficient shipwrights and artisans should come to Constantinople as soon as possible.

198. English Money for Henry IV
                            Antwerp
                            November 25, 1589
    Letters from London of the 18th inst. have been received this week announcing that the Queen of England has recently sent £20,000 to France for the King of Navarre. They write also that the King of Scots is said to have gone to Denmark in person, in order to accompany his wife from there. But it has been reported from Hamburg that this Lady has already gone to Scotland. Which is correct we shall hear.

198-199. Some Spanish Ships are safe, but where are the rest?
                            Lyons
                            December 1, 1589
    From Madrid in Spain comes news of the 11th inst. [sic] that twelve vessels from India have reached San Lucar with general cargoes, but the big ships which are to bring some twelve millions worth have not yet arrived. They are supposed to have steered a different course for greater safety. There are still 25 English raiders at sea which are said to have attacked and pillaged Valenga and carried off some vessels from Brazil and Porto Rico. But, as the entire fleet from New Spain with its escort numbers over 80 vessels, it is hoped that it will be able to get past the English without damage. Others report that news has come in these letters from Spain that the fleet from New Spain has separated into two divisions. Twenty-eight of the largest ships with the bulk of the valuables have taken a different route, but of their whereabouts nothing is known, whereas the majority of the fleet, that is 60 vessels with the less valuable cargo, came the most direct way and reached Seville on the 12th. Seven of them were damaged in a storm and a few sunk. However, most of the property on board was recovered. The Spanish Court awaits news of the 41 remaining ships with the utmost eagerness.

199. Heavy Trade Losses caused by the English
                            Antwerp
                            December 16, 1589
    Letters from Zeeland report that they have received letters there from Lisbon with the news that owing to a storm thirty vessels of the New Spain fleet could not come in, and that fifteen of them have been lost. The English corsairs have taken seven vessels of this fleet, the rest is still at sea, and is being chased by the English. This tidings has caused the greatest consternation here on Change and many bankruptcies are to be feared.

199-200. Elizabeth a Knight of gay and indomitable spirit
                            Venice
                            January 15, 1590
    Some people assert that they have read letters arrived from Lyons by the latest post reporting the great preparations for war in France, Germany and England on behalf of the King of Navarre. The English Queen would seem to be specially well disposed towards him, and as token of her good will has sent him the English Order of the Garter, and written that she will never desert him, and will use all her power to put him on the throne of France. To this news some add that the King of Navarre, when he becomes King of France, will give her the Order of St. Michael in return, for she is a Knight, he says, because of her gay and indomitable spirit, of which she has more than is to be found in other women. She has valiantly defended herself against the power of such great and mighty foes, against two of the greatest Kings in the world, whom she grievously insulted, and she has preserved her realm despite attempts to split it into factions, to propagate discord, and to invade it with a powerful Armada.
    Letters of the 19th ult. arrived from Constantinople lat Monday with news of the return of Hassan Aga, General-at-sea. He is ill seen, however, owing to his lack of success in the expedition against Barbary. Better measures shall in future be taken at Constantinople to prevent the Christian corsairs from doing so much damage. An ambassador from Persia is expected at Constantinople, and great preparations are being made for his reception. A big navy is also being equipped, and some say that peace between the King of Spain and the Grand Turk has come to nothing, because the King tried to include in the peace all the Princes of the House of Austria, especially the Emperor and the Isle of Malta. But the Grand Turk will consent to nothing more than the conclusion of peace with the King of Spain and all his territories, in whatever part of the world they may be. However, hope of a favourable result has not entirely disappeared. There is plague and great scarcity in Constantinople, and the poor are suffering grievously. Hassan Aga’s galleys are in such bad condition that they would have succumbed if they had met the Spaniards on the way. They say here that the Queen of England is very ill; she is in danger of her life, and in the grip of some terrible disease.

200. English Loot not so very great after all
                            Venice
                            January 26, 1590
    They write from Lisbon on the 2nd ult. that there is news from the Azores that Admiral Alvaro de Flores, after the English had fought him and had failed to do him any damage, brought himself and his ships into safety. He is said to have had four millions on board and to have received useful assistance in driving off the corsairs. He was to be escorted to Seville where the three ships with the 12 1/2 millions just mentioned have arrived from Peru. The English loot does not exceed 500,000 crowns, though the French give out that it amounts to several millions in gold.
    From Madrid, dated the 15th ult., comes the announcement that ship construction continues in Biscay, and 60 large vessels are expected to be ready in the spring. No vessel either in the harbours or arriving there is allowed to leave. It is also stated that sailors have been sent for from Italy and gunners from Germany. A nobleman of Alexandria is said to have promised to produce 200 such gunners soon, if His Majesty will give him a few men and a little ammunition to drill with. Some declare they have seen an agent of the Queen of England here who has asked the government to hand him over for cash 6000 muskets. But this was at once refused, as the arms were sure to be used against the Catholics.

200-201. Cumberland reaches England with immense Spoil
                            Antwerp
                            January 27, 1590
    London letters to here report that the Earl of Cumberland and his ships have reached England with immense spoil. He has come to London in person with the mail. On two of the Indian vessels there would seem to have been 400,000 marks in silver, 250 chests of cochineal each weighing 130 lbs., 8000 ox hides and a quantity of other valuable goods. On one of the ships, moreover, were the Governor of Mexico and his son. They have been taken to England. This loss of the Indian vessels will cause much sorrow in Spain and elsewhere.

201-202. Probable Bankruptcies in Seville
                            Antwerp
                            February 13, 1590
    London letters of the 25th ult. have been received this week. They mention that Lord Cumberland has come to England with sixteen Indian ships which he has taken. Rather a high figure. From another London source we are notified that the Indian ships which the English have taken had over 20,000 lbs. of cochineal on board. Also a high figure. There were other goods on board, and gold and silver as well. This is a serious loss for traders, and it is to be feared that Seville will not get through without bankruptcies. In our business here things are none too good either. God the Lord protect each one of us from harm!

202. Failing Turkey, Elizabeth turns to Fez and Morocco
                            Venice
                            March 2, 1590
                            background: George Clifford, third Earl of Cumberland, 1558-1605, the well-known English sailor. Fought against the Armada in 1588. In vessels placed at his disposal by the Queen he made raids upon Spain and, in concert with Drake, on the West Indies. In 1591 he sailed to Portugal in Royal ships and carried off rich booty. In 1592 he received the Order of the Garter, in 1593 with John Burgh he carried off the chief vessels of the Spanish Indian fleet, in 1597 he made his great expedition to Porto Rico. He was called the Don Quixote of the sea and died heavily in debt.
    Some merchants here have received news that the Queen of England is vexed because her vigorous efforts to procure the despatch of a Turkish fleet against the King of Spain have failed. She hears with indignation that peace with His Majesty has been prolonged for another three years. So her thoughts and proposals have turned towards the Kings of Fez and Morocco, who are to be made to feel the suzerainty of the King of Spain burdensome. She is said to have persuaded them, if she should send a fleet to Portugal, to provide her with assistance, 15,000 men and 20,000 crowns a month, for the duration of the war. They are also to help in provisioning her fleet, and if required open their harbours to her.

202. Captured Spanish Letters being decoded in London
                            Middelburg
                            March 22, 1590
    Monsieur van Aldegonde, who at the time of the fall of Antwerp was mayor of the city, is said to be on a visit to the Queen of England in London, in order to decode for her some intercepted Spanish and Lorraine letters written in cipher and presumed to be from the King of Spain. He is subsequently to go to the King of Navarre, to whom he will naturally communicate many secrets contained in them.

203. The English spare no one
                            Hamburg
                            April 8, 1590
    From London we hear nothing of the cash supposed to have arrived there. Not only here but at Frankfurt and in the country of Holstein the English Merchant Adventurers have been trying to raise a sum of money at interest. But they have got none, as their credit is not good. From Lisbon they write that the King of Spain is fitting out vessels against the English corsairs. These corsairs spare no one with their rapine and theft, and do much damage to ships from Peru and other places. But latterly they have attacked private individuals mostly and not the King. So the hapless merchant has to be plucked. God comfort the sufferers!

203. A Scotch Alchemist at Prague
                            Venice
                            March 30, 1590
                            background: The once celebrated Mamugnano’s real name was Mamugna. He was a Greek Cypriote. He came to Italy in 1578 and attracted much attention by his arts, especially at Venice. In 1588, calling himself Count Marco Bragadini, he went to Germany and created a great stir at Vienna, and still more at the Court of Rudolph II at Prague. At Munich too he met with considerable success at first, but ultimately by order of the Duke he was hanged as a cheat on a tinselled gallows in 1590.
    We hear from Spain that the kingdom fears the Queen of England will send her fleet again this spring to raid coast towns. The King is taking useful counter-measures and assembling many ships in Corunna harbour. A letter from Prague states that a native of Scotland has arrived there with thirty-five horses. He gives himself out as a real artist who knows how to make gold, and is not inferior to Mamugnano in Venice.

203-204. Brunswick Mercenaries for Holland
                            Antwerp
                            March 31, 1590
    The rumour is circulating that the Queen of England is raising 1200 horse in Brunswick for the Hollanders, so that they may at once keep the Prince of Parma occupied and prevent him from giving so much assistance to the League in France. So we shall have a bad summer in this country, since the Queen of England is also equipping a much larger number of foot for these Hollanders.

204. The Spaniards suspected of Designs on Ireland
                            Antwerp
                            May 26, 1590
    Letters of the 25th inst. have come from London saying that no Spanish fleet has arrived in Ireland, though it is stated that the Governor of Ireland is in league with the Spaniards and has therefore been arrested. The Queen of England seems to have sent ten thousand men under Colonel Norris to Ireland because she is suspicious of the Spanish fleet. Some have also been informed that the Queen is in bad health.

204. Hamburg Deputation to the Queen
                            Staden
                            July 12, 1590
    The Hamburgers despatched some representatives to the Queen of England a week ago. They are going to request that their ancient traditions and usages may remain intact, and that no innovations infringing them be introduced. We shall no doubt hear what the Queen’s answer will be. Much strange talk is going round, but nobody knows any real foundation for it. Eight members of the Common Council were deputed by the Aldermen to make this journey, and what the Aldermen do the Common Council will have to do also. God the Lord grant that all may turn out for the best!

204. Negotiations in Germany
                            Hamburg
                            July 15, 1590
    What the English envoy, Horatio Pallavicini, has obtained from the secular German Princes for his Queen is unknown, but the tale is that he has had poor success as he went to them with empty hands. He returned to Staden a week ago and sailed the next day express to England. As the wind is fair he should get to London within four days.

205. Secret Councils in Madrid
                            Rome
                            July 14, 1590
                            background: Rodrigo de Castro was Cardinal of Seville 1583-1600. Caspar de Quiroga was Cardinal of Toledo 1577-1594.
    Letters from Madrid in Spain report that His Majesty holds one secret council weekly with the Cardinals of Seville and Toledo, his confessor and other ecclesiastics. Also no secrets must be committed to writing, as letters may be intercepted and opened.

205-207. Appeal of the English Ambassador to the Turk
Constantinople
8 November 1589
background: Copy of a petition addressed by the English ambassador to the Sultan.
    It has pleased the Almighty to make me the chief instrument in the most Holy Alliance between my exalted Mistress the Queen of England and Your Imperial Majesty. With the utmost zeal and fidelity have I laboured through a period of eight years in order that to the greater glory of God, our common foes, all of them accursed idolaters, might through the great power entrusted unto us be utterly destroyed. Now from the Councillors of Your Magnificence I received four years since a solemn oath that your magnificence would begin a war with the King of Spain if my Mistress, who hitherto had lived in profound peace with the King of Spain, the chief of all idolaters, should chance to make war with him. Never have I ceased to beg and to implore my Mistress to make war. And she herself has withal dissolved the ancient alliance with Spain and commenced a most furious struggle by land and by sea, which during the space of three years she has waged with the greatest success. Although the Spaniard has demanded peace of my Mistress on divers untoward conditions, yet has she never granted it to him. I have on the contrary in my despatches always dissuaded her from peace and incessantly promised her that Your Magnificence, loyal to your early promises, was on the point of preparing a formidable fleet. During this time my Mistress has so long waited that she has begun to doubt my loyalty, for I have many enemies who assure my Mistress that your Magnificence will not make war, therefore I expect daily a letter from my Mistress to recall me, and on my return I fear to lose my head in consequence. Your Magnificence will now comprehend what an unjust fate is meted out to me on the part of both your Majesties as reward for my devoted efforts. Therefore I implore Your Magnificence in the name of the Most High God to have regard for an innocent man, and at length, if you desire not to despatch all your terrible forces against that idolater, then at least to send forth 60 or 80 galleys to his undoing, and moreover into those neighbouring territories from which he has withdrawn all his forces to oppose my Mistress. these provinces will be all the easier to devastate as they are entirely void of troops and will thus be more easily subjected to your empire. I conjure Your Magnificence to use this most favourable moment for your glory and the aggrandisement of your kingdom. God has created you the most renowned of men and the greatest of all princes; may He bless you with all good fortune for the destruction of this idolater. But if you contemn my Mistress and esteem of little worth the great deeds she, a woman, has so valiantly done in the war, her wrath will be great against you, and the world will reproach you hereafter for the basest ingratitude in that you have forsaken that monarch who has been your most faithful comrade. Confiding in the friendship and promises of Your Magnificence, she has exposed her life and her realm for the sake of Your Magnificence to such dangers that they cannot be described. But now it will be the heart’s desire of the Spaiard utterly to destroy my Mistress, for she has refused him peace; and he can put complete trust in the help of the Pope, of all other idolatrous Princes, and of the Emperor. Then he will turn his invincible forces to your overthrow and that of your realm, that he may be the only sovereign. For the Pope ceases not to encompass him with his lying prophecies, and the Pope is looked upon by these rulers as in some wise a God upon earth. But if your Magnificence in concert with my Mistress goes to war at sea wisely, valiantly and without delay, as God Almighty of a surety enjoins in accordance with your pledged word at this favourable moment and to the great glory of Turkey and of her people and the general welfare of your realm—then the proud Spaniard and the lying Pope will be cheated of their assured hope of victory and will suffer chastisement for their presumption. God will protect us alone and will punish these idolaters more severely by our means. On beholding this, all those who live as heretics will return to our faith, and He will bless us, who strive for His glory, with victories untold.

207. Hamburgers looted off Harwich
                            Middelburg
                            July 19, 1590
    The sixteen warships of the Queen of England are still lying at Plymouth. Of the Spanish Armada we hear nothing. Ten English vessels laden with merchandise from Liguria, Civita Vecchia, Marseilles, Venice and Tripoli fought with the Spanish galleys for seven hours. One was destroyed, the rest have reached London. They are said to have killed many Spaniards. Two Hamburg vessels have arrived in London. They were looted off Harwich by an English pirate who had letters of marque from the King of Navarre. They seem to have carried about £6000 worth of cargo. The injured parties persuaded the Admiral to send a pinnace after the pirate to obtain the release of the property, as their passport provided that they should be totally unmolested. English and foreigners had property on these vessels. These are hard times for traders.

207-208. The English make many Enemies
                            Middelburg
                            August 5, 1590
    Pallavicini is proceeding to France with an English gentleman. The German Princes are providing help to the King of Navarre at his own cost, but he requires help at their expense on the ground of his long-standing alliance with them. There is trouble between the English and the Hamburgers. As they are making naval preparations it is possible that they have designs against the English, or perhaps against the citizens of Staden, which city the English turn the whole world against them. They have held up many Holland ships and the Queen’s Admiral with his pinnaces loots everything he comes upon, without meeting any resistance.

208. The Scotchman enters Prague in state
                            Prague
                            August 14, 1590
    On a Monday recently a Scotchman said to be an adept in the black arts came into the town. He moved in with forty fine horses ridden by twenty of his servants and with three coaches. One of these is very handsome and upholstered in red velvet. He rode in it himself. He occupies magnificent apartments in the Old Town and is visited by many of the Nobility and Gentry. Whether he will stay here long is unknown.

208-209. Strange Behaviour of the French Ambassador at Constantinople
                            Constantinople
                            August 20, 1590
    The English envoy has obtained this much, that fairly energetic preparations are to be seen, in particular orders have been given for fresh galleys to be built by next spring. But there is more talk than reality in this. The French envoy has managed to be taken on again as ambassador. So he declares that he will remain here after all. For a journey he wanted to make he applied for 5000 crowns to a distinguished Jew, and the latter refused his request. Upon this the envoy, with the help of three renegades whom he used as witnesses, accused the Jew of having stolen from Don Antonio and brought here 1 1/2 millions in gold. Wherefore the Jew was sent to the galleys till he should pay down the money. He has already surrendered 20,000 gold pieces to the Grand Vizier, and to the Sultan a note of hand for 160,000 ducats obtained from the Prince of Wallachia. He has also presented him with a diamond chain valued at 200,000 ducats and various other articles put at 100,000 ducats. But he is still on the galley and will have to hand over the rest. Thus he is getting some of the reward he deserves and will serve others as a warning not to trust in future to loyalty and good faith here.

209. The Turks are tricking the English, and do not mean to fight
                            Constantinople
                            August 27, 1590
                            background: The Usbeks are a Turkish tribe which during the 16th century aimed at possession of Baku, Khiva and Bokhara. To this day their territory reaches the Caspian.
    The Grand Vizier has summoned the Persians in residence here and required them to write to their master as soon as possible that the Sultan has rejected the embassy and the request of their master, as he is unable to give assistance against the Usbeks. It would seem as though he were helping the latter against the Persians. Every one had better ponder this well, especially the English, who brag that they are bamboozling the Sultan and driving him into war with the Spaniards. If necessity should arise they will receive the same answer as the Persians, and, although the Grand Vizier has promised the English envoy 200 galleys next year and admonished him to urge his Queen to persevere in the struggle, the envoy will see just a little of this support in future as hitherto. The Grand Vizier has, moreover, indicated to certain Turks of good position that this English envoy is still a young man and is being treated as his youth deserves. Neither the envoy nor his queen will ever see the Sultan granting the Queen of England a fleet at his own cost unless with all due formality she puts down cash for expenses beforehand and gives ample security for all loss. Then perhaps something might be done.

210. The Turks will really fight in the Spring
                            Constantinople
                            September 15, 1590
    There is much talk here of a hundred galleys together with the ships from the Archipelago being sent out from here next spring on the side of the Queen of England and the King of Navarre. Mohammed Pasha, now in retirement, married to the only sister of the present Sultan, is to be appointed to the supreme command of this fleet.

210. Spanish Escort for the Peru Fleet
                            Venice
                            October 27, 1590
    Madrid, under date the 21st ult., confirms the arrival of two galliots from New Spain and Portugal. They bring 2 1/2 millions in gold to the King and report that the Peru fleet remains behind very richly laden. So 34 large and well-armed ships have put out from Galicia to escort this fleet and clear the sea of the English and French pirates.

210. The English cannot bear the wet and cold of Flanders
                            Antwerp
                            October 27, 1590
    The States General are alleged to be embarking some troops to send to Flanders and join the English. But we have letters from London of the 16th inst. which make no mention of the English coming over. As the weather has come on very wet6 we hear that the English will not be over again this year, as they do not bear the cold well. So not much will be done in Flanders during the winter season.

210. The Turks are not really arming
                            Constantinople
                            October 27, 1590
    Although all sorts of orders have been issued for the equipment of a fleet next spring, and many think we shall see something impressive, there is little trace of it all here, and the Arsenal is empty to such a degree that there are not enough stores to fit out properly four or five galleys at a pinch.

211. The English are robbing Hollanders and Zeelanders
                            Antwerp
                            November 3, 1590
    We hear from Zeeland that the English corsairs are said to have taken 26 vessels, both Hollander and Zeelander coming from Spain and mostly laden with salt, also two vessels with valuable cargoes from Zeeland on their way to Spain. As the English are thus robbing the Hollanders and Zeelanders and confiscating their ships, these latter might soon denounce their alliance with the English and try to come to terms with the King. Great losses and injuries soon part friends.

211. More English Captures at Sea
                            Antwerp
                            November 10, 1590
    This evening letters come again from London by Zeeland, dated the last of last month, stating that the English corsairs have captured and brought to England twelve vessels on their way from San Domingo. They are laden with quantities of sugar, ginger and hides. The English seem to have found out from the passengers and crews that the fleet from Peru and New Spain is about to sail. They have also discovered the route this fleet means to take, so they have placed themselves upon it in order to lie in wait.

211-212. The Turks hard at work arming
                            Venice
                            December 7, 1590
    Under date October 26, we are advised from Constantinople that the envoy of His Imperial Majesty in His Majesty’s name has offered the customary gifts to the Grand Turk and has made other presentations to the chief Pashas at the Porte. The plague is committing great ravages in the city. Eighteen clerks at the Porte have been punished for forgery. The chief one was executed, the rest either had their hands cut off or were sent to the galleys. The Arsenal is hard at work on a fleet. It is asserted that this is being done at the instance of the Queen of England. But in private the presumption is that it is due to the revolt in Africa, which spreads daily to the great detriment of the Turks.

212. Valuable Prizes taken by the English
                            Antwerp
                            December 9, 1590
    It is confirmed from Zeeland that on the 17th ult. the English brought a big Venetian ship of 800 tons bound from Lisbon to the Barbary coast into Plymouth to be unloaded. It carried 1200 sacks of corn as stores for the Viceroy, and five barrels of gold for the payment of the garrison. From there this ship was to have sailed to Alicante to take in a cargo of Spanish wool. The ship has as well 544 bags of pepper, 388 chests of sugar belonging to Rafaele Fontani, and Giuliano Naso of Florence, and to Ludovico Vesato. These goods will presumably be liberated, although the English had already unloaded 400 bags of pepper. But they have been ordered to put them in the Queen’s warehouse. The ship Maria Margherita, likewise captured by the English, had on board 300 bags of pepper, 160 chests of sugar and 7 bales of raw silk. It is to be hoped that all this will be released. However, the cash and jewels belonging to the passengers and worth well over 15,000 ducats are probably lost. We have definite news too from the Portuguese that the ship called La Capitania has also been taken by the English. On board of it there seem to have been the Viceroy and 1500 nobles, an enormous quantity of money and much other merchandise. This ship left Lisbon last month for Portuguese India, but only got to the Cape of Good Hope and then sailed back to Lisbon because it was too late for it to complete its voyage to Portuguese India this year.

212-213. Hawkins suspected of Treachery
                            Antwerp
                            December 22, 1590
    Last summer the Queen of England had a fleet at sea of which an English Knight, Captain Hawkins, was Admiral. His duty was to prevent the Spanish fleet from reaching Brittany, but against the wishes of his fellow Captains he let it through. When he returned home with his fleet and appeared in person before the Queen, she sent him home to his estate. He is said to be under secret observation for fear of his escaping, for the Queen strongly suspects that not only he but some other important gentlemen have a private understanding with the King of Spain.

213. Work at Constantinople continues
                            Constantinople
                            January 3, 1591
    The English agent is summoned by Uluch Ali almost daily for consultation about the often discussed fleet and expedition. Armaments, too, are being pushed on rapidly, and the Grand Vizier is at the Arsenal himself every day. But the universal opinion, supported also by appearances, is that this year it will not be possible to put to sea with 300 galleys.

213. Elizabeth demands a Loan from all Rich People
                            Antwerp
                            January 15, 1591
    London Letters of the 3rd inst. say that a report is circulating there that the King of Spain is dead. The Queen of England has demanded a loan of money from all rich people. Each of them, in proportion to his means, must lend without interest for a year. She has sent powder and munitions of war to France and is arming busily.

213-214. A Religious Rising in Palestine
                            Venice
                            January 15, 1591
    English merchants here declare that their Queen has given orders for the release of all Venetian ships stopped by English raiders.
    The Levantine Jews here say that they gather from letters of the 29th ult. from Tripoli and of the 21st from Aleppo that there is a vast religious rising along the borders of Palestine under the command of two men who give themselves out for true prophets and interpreters of the laws of Mahomet, and assert that they have been sent by the coming Messiah to lead the people back from darkness to the light and the truth.

214-215. Letter from the Sultan to the French King
Constantinople
29 December 1590
background: Specimen of a letter from Sultan Murad to Henry, Emperor or Padishah of France.
    We desire that it may be made known to you that the English envoy resident at Our happy and glorious Porte has addressed a petition to Our happy Porte and delivered to Us letters from the Queen of England saying: that the King of Spain, who hitherto has had nothing to fear from Our country, has occupied Portugal and expelled the King of Portugal, Don Antonio, from his kingdom. And, not content with this ill deed, he is laying plans for war against you and wishes to drive you too from your kingdom. Now for many years we have maintained close friendship with the Kings of France and have promised to treat the subjects of France as Our own, so that they might not be incommoded nor injured in the slightest degree. By the help and grace of the Almighty Creator we will this year send out a number of Our galleys, and next year will equip 300. In command of these will be the very vigilant, prudent, sagacious, veteran in war, most richly adorned with all virtues and withal most fortunate servant of Our most happy and exalted Porte, after Ourself the most distinguished man in the Empire, the highest Lord and Governor, Our Vizier Sinan Pasha. He will be placed at the head of Our army as Commander-in-chief, he will command in the war at sea, for within Our realm the equipment of galleys has already commenced. We have already reminded the Queen of England in Our letters that she also should equip her ships for Our assistance. It is therefore necessary that, on reception of Our letters through the English envoy, you should not do less than the kingdom of England. You must be steadfast in assembling your army and in keeping it prepared. If, on the part of the King of Spain, war should be begun, and he should molest Us, you must not be found unready. Our armament will, with the help of the Almighty Creator, be completed in good time and will be despatched to your aid at a fitting moment without fail. When this aid comes into being you will not only be strengthened, but your heart will rejoice thereat. To attain this object you must spare no trouble.
    To confirm this despatch we furnish it with Our own Sign Manual.
    May this message be favourably received. Fare well and happily.

215-217. Letter from the Sultan to the Queen
Constantinople
January 20, 1591
background: Specimen of a letter from the Sultan to the Queen of England.
    On reception of Our letter you are to know that your letters have reached Our happy and exalted Porte. Inasmuch as for some years past no danger has threatened the King of Spain from Our country, he has expelled the King of Portugal, Don Antonio, from his realm and occupied Portugal. Not content therewith he has for many years been attacking Henry, King of France, who has maintained friendship with Our happy and most mighty Porte, after the same manner as Don Antonio, and has been minded to expel him from the kingdom of France. He has not ceased, day and night, to molest him. Therefore Burton, in residence at Our blessed and exalted Porte, communicated to Us in a petition that the King of Spain has subjected Portugal to his authority. This kingdom adjoins the Kingdom of Fez, and Don Antonio asked from the Prince of Fez assistance, to wit that the Prince of Fez should grant him the help of his army. They mutually promised to provide the costs, in such wise that Don Antonio is to pay cash so soon as he gains possession of Portugal. To confirm this his promise he consented to furnish a hostage and did indeed send his own son as hostage to the Prince of Fez. Then he attacked Portugal by sea. The faithless Prince of Fez sent to Don Antonio’s assistance neither men nor money. When Don Antonio saw that he had been deceived, he broke off the war at sea and returned safe and sound to England to fight again later. After the intentions of the Prince of Fez had become evident, you requested me to send an envoy to this prince to fetch back the son of Don Antonio. but he not only refused to return him but actually arrested your merchants trading in Fez, stole their goods, and incarcerated the merchants themselves to please the King of Spain. Others again he has killed under torture in prison. All your businesses carried on in the kingdom of Fez and all your interests existing in other localities have been described to Us in the petition of your envoy delivered by him into Our own hands. Our profound wisdom has comprehended this. With the help of the Almighty Creator we will despatch some galleys this year, but next year, by the aid of the Almighty and Most Merciful Creator, we will send three hundred galleys and some galleons. Our fleet will be commanded by the most vigilant, wisest veteran in war, the most richly endowed with all virtues, the chiefest of officials, a governor, after Ourself the bearer of the highest dignities at Our brilliant and blessed Porte, Our Grand Vizier Sinan Pasha. May the Almighty Creator be his helper. We have determined to send him as General against the kingdom of Spain, and Our orders unchangeable and all-compelling have already been despatched to Our Captains commanding at sea. Other affairs and other circumstances you already know from letters which have been sent to you. It is essential that you too should at once devote the utmost care to military affairs and exert all your powers to raise within your realm the largest army possible and to equip the greatest possible number of ships. After reception of Our letters you should by no means delay, but must at once in all quarters of your kingdom equip an army and also royal ships that they, in concert with Our ships, which will sail from here, may, with your approval, capture as many places as possible. In Our Arsenal and throughout Our Empire preparations are being made with unparalleled efficiency for the construction of galleys, and all places suitable for the building of galleys are being used for the purpose to the uttermost. Without pause, by day and by night, we cease not to urge on and to push forward with the help of the Almighty Creator the ships which we intend to equip so that they may be able to face all tempests. The King of France also is recruiting his subjects and commands them not to move from their houses and not to leave their homes. We will send him help and we are confirming this in a letter which we are addressing to him. Keep peace with him and encourage each other with firm and steadfast mind. To the Prince of Fez we are forwarding strongly worded despatches insisting on the return of the son of Don Antonio to Our most happy and exalted Porte. We are also addressing stern orders to the Prince of Fez for the liberation of the merchants imprisoned in Fez and for permission for them to pursue their avocations in that realm without hindrance. These are being conveyed by trusty messengers in safe galleys. In this manner he cannot possibly be disobedient to Us. We wish you health and that in future you may be able to furnish Us with useful tidings.
    In this manner, honoured Sir, I give you a specimen of letters such as the Sultan writes to the Queen of England and to the King of France. The letters of the Grand Vizier are of the same nature. They do not differ from those of the Sultan. We have no other news.
                        
217-218. The Pope declares Henry of Navarre a Heretic
                            Rome
                            January 26, 1591
    After holding some Congregations about French affairs, the pope has sent the Nuncio in Paris 60,000 crowns in addition to the monthly contribution of 15,000 crowns for the League. Besides this the Pope will send Briefs to Cardinals Vendôme, Lenoncourt and Gondi and to other clergy, and will excommunicate them if they do not abandon the King of Navarre. This latter the Pope is now calling a heretic, and a rebel against the Church of Christ who has forfeited his claims to the French Crown. Similar Briefs are to be addressed to all nobles in France and also to all the Princes of the League, reminding them of their duty and allegiance and encouraging them to pursue and utterly extirpate the heretics.
Pierre de Gondi, 1533-1616, Cardinal and Bishop of Paris. A zealous supporter of Henry IV, who co-operated enthusiastically in the King’s reconciliation with Rome.
Philippe de Lenoncourt, Cardinal and Archbishop of Rheims, 1526-1591.
Charles, Cardinal of Vendôme, of the House of Bourbon, 1523-1590.

218. Active preparations for a Turkish Fleet
                            Constantinople
                            February 2, 1591
    The extensive preparations for a Turkish fleet are being pushed forward with daily increasing energy, and only during the last week many messengers about the business have been sent out. Considerable mystery is still being made over it, and influential people, Turks and others, say that an enterprise of the sort is not so easily carried out as is generally believed. Uluch Ali says they are going to sail where the Christians are least prepared for them.
    The English envoy here rejoices at the Turkish fleet and has recently sent some of his staff to England. He has also attended a Council to discuss whether the son of Don Antonio should be demanded from the King of Fez and brought here. Orders about this have already been issued and sent from here to Jaffa by land. For the greater security of this mission it will be sent by water.

218-219. Drake is about to sail
                            Antwerp
                            February 2, 1591
    All we hear from England is that over there in London 30 ships are ready to sail under Captain Drake, the Earl of Cumberland and several other gentlemen, to lie in wait for the Spanish fleet.
    The King of Scots is to send out 4000 soldiers to the King of Navarre at his own expense next March. The Queen of England, however, is to pay them for six months.
    Lisbon letters of the 18th ult. report that not far from there the English carried off a vessel, causing a loss to Giovanni Battista Revallo of 50,000 crowns and to other merchants of about 80,000.

219. English Raiders off Cape St. Vincent
                            Venice
                            February 15, 1591
    The English here state that 60 English raiders are already off Cape St. Vincent to stop the Spanish ships sailing out to escort the fleet from New Spain.
    Some Genoese traders have made an offer to the King of Spain to guard the Straits of Gibraltar at their own expense, but they require the King to pay them five per cent on the goods passing through.

219. English Money to Hamburg for Mercenaries
                            Cologne
                            February 21, 1591
    Two ships from London are expected at Hamburg. They will be escorted there by eight warships, and are to bring £100,000 in cash to raise troops for the Queen of England and the King of Navarre.

219-220. Extensive Recruitment in Germany
                            Düsseldorf
                            March 3, 1591
                            background: William IV, the Wise, Landgrave of Hesse-Cassel, 1531-1592.
    It is confidently announced that representatives of the King of Navarre and of the Queen of England have received permission to recruit 6000 horse and 12,000 foot for Navarre and England in the territories of the Dukes of Saxony, Brunswick and Hesse. The representatives have brought over 160,000 ducats and have offered to deposit these with the Elector of Saxony. The Queen of England proposes to send 3000 lancers and 6000 Swiss to the Netherlands to prevent the Duke of Parma from taking a larger part in the war in France. The German troops are to be assembled and trained in the territory of Münster.
    Thus we shall have a strange summer and no mention of the long-desired peace.

220. English Ships waiting for the Peru Fleet
                            Antwerp
                            March 23, 1591
    London letters of the 7th inst. say that they have learnt from a captured despatch caravel that the fleet from new Spain and Peru will leave Havana for Spain on the last day of this month. So 70 English warships have put to sea to lie in wait for this fleet, and others are to follow daily. It is also reported that several thousand men are to be sent from England to Brittany against the Spaniards.

220. Philip raising Money on his Indian Possessions
                            Rome
                            April 15, 1591
    The tale is going round that the King of Spain has summoned a meeting of twenty-six influential persons to distribute all Indian possessions among certain individuals who are to hold them in fee. He proposes to sell the possessions partly to Spaniards, partly to Indians. His Majesty expects to receive 24 millions for this.

220. Some Ships safe, but the English have yet another Prize
                            Rome
                            April 27, 1591
                            background: Azabra, a Spanish word meaning a Cantabrian brig of from 160 to 170 tons burthen.
    It is confirmed from Spain that three azabras and the flagship have reached Seville from Peru in safety with 800,000 crowns. But it is also announced that to the south of Portugal the English have captured a ship valued at 250,000 crowns on its way from China. Moreover, they have destroyed 14 of the ships trying to sail from Spain to India. So the King is negotiating with certain traders for a loan of 200,000 crowns for the Netherlands.

221. No English to trade with the League
                            Antwerp
                            May 6, 1591
    Letters from London of the 1st inst. state that the Queen of England has issued orders that on pain of death neither her own subjects nor foreigners are to import anything from members of the League in France. The Admiral of England is said to be starting for Brittany with Colonel Norris and 7000 English soldiers, because the Queen of England refuses to have the Spaniards as neighbours.
    From Zeeland we receive news that the English warships have stopped vessels coming from Spain and Portugal and robbed them of their best merchandise, and the other ships with the rest of the property they have obliged to sail to England. All this loss falls entirely upon traders and there will be great ruin. Besides this, 17 ships from Lisbon tried to sail to Brittany with troops, munitions and other things for the League on board, but these also they carried off to England.

221. The Indian Fleet sails under convoy
                            Lyons
                            May 6, 1591
    On the 4th of April five vessels left Lisbon for India and one for Malacca. They are not taking much cash. They are escorted by eleven well-armed Netherlands ships with Portuguese and Spanish soldiers on board. But it is feared that they will be insufficient to protect the ships, and that in the coming summer the English will again worry us greatly. May the Almighty guard all from harm, bring safely in the two or three vessels due this autumn, and grant those outward bound a prosperous journey.

221-222. Kelly, the Alchemist, locked up
                            Prague
                            May 8, 1591
                            background: The English alchemist Edward Kelley, 1555-1595, perhaps studied at oxford, and was a pupil of the renowned alchemist John Dee. With him he went to the Imperial Court at Prague in 1583. There he enjoyed high favour with the Emperor, but was imprisoned for the first time in 1589. In 1595 he was incarcerated for the second time and lost his life in attempting to escape. He left behind his documents of scientific value.
    You will have heard something concerning the alchemist Kelley. He was recently identified and detained by a messenger at Sobieslau, a small town near Budweis, as he was hastening to Herr von Rosenberg’s. This occurred just as he was having fresh horses put to his coach outside the posting-house. He was not willing to suffer arrest. Later on His Majesty sent the Chief Constable and one of his men in one coach and the Provost-Marshal and some musketeers in another to bring Kelley into imperial jurisdiction at the castle of Pürglitz, and have him locked up there. He was not even allowed a bread knife, everything was taken away. His servants are still here under restraint. But his wife and other women are kept under arrest at home. It would appear that there is something behind all this, we do not yet know what.

222. A mysterious Frenchman at Ragusa
                            Venice
                            May 19, 1591
    A distinguished French gentleman with a suite has passed through Ragusa disguised as a monk, so as not to be recognized on the journey. But as they have with them a lot of silk costumes, golden and otherwise, it is thought that they are a Navarrese or English mission.

222. Kelley is being well looked after. Why?
                            Prague
                            May 21, 1591
    There is nothing fresh about our imprisoned English alchemist. He was rather ill, so they looked after him better. He is therefore being treated gingerly. There is evidently something odd about it all.

222-223. English Ships bring Corn to Venice
                            Venice
                            June 14, 1591
    Two ships have arrived here from England laden with corn. Sixteen more English grain-ships are hourly expected. They bring letters to our authorities from their Queen with very friendly offers and the promise to send as much more grain as the Venetian government desires. The Queen of England has caused the property to be restored which her raiders removed from captured Venetian vessels a few months ago. She has forbidden on pain of death any further molestation on the part of her subjects of Venetian, Florentine or Genoese vessels, and desires that they may trade freely with her subjects. So it is to be hoped that trade will improve.

223-226. Intercepted Letter to the Queen by her Ambassador in France
Caen
15 June 1591
                        background: Translation of a letter to the Queen of England written by her ambassador. The letter was intercepted near Mouy by the garrison of Havre. This Bishop of Èvreux was Jacques du Perron, later a Cardinal, 1556-1618. Sophi. See note on 8. Philip Emanuel de Lorraine, Duc de Mercœur, often also called Mercurio, 1558-1602, married Mary, Duches of Étampes, and was head of the Catholic party in Brittany, of which country he hoped to become independent Duke. He therefore summoned Spaniards into France to help against the protestants and especially Henry IV. An English landing in France was the consequence. Defeated by Henry IV, he was to have been executed, but, as he was one of the chief landowners in France, Henry IV’s mistress, Gabrielle d’Estrées, persuaded the King to marry his natural son by her, César de Vendôme, to Françoise de Lorraine, daughter of the Duke, and to grant the latter his life. The Duke entered into Imperial service, fought the Turks as Lieutenant-General and died at Nuremberg in 1602. Charles of Lorraine, Duke of Mayenne, second son of Francis of Lorraine, Duke of Guise, 1554-1611. He was leader of the troops of the Guises against the Huguenots and one of the most dangerous opponents of Henry IV. At the beginning of the reign of Henry IV he tried, in conjunction with the Spanish ambassador Mendoza, to have the Cardinal of Bourbon (Charles X) proclaimed King. When Henry IV submitted to the Catholic church he became reconciled to him. Louviers, a small Norman town, captured for Henry IV by the Marshal de Biron on June 6, 1591. The Leaguers strove in vain to recover it. Charles of Lorraine, fourth Duke of Guise, Prince of Dombes, Admiral of the Seas in the Levant, 1572-1640. For a while he aimed at the Crown of France, but then became a zealous adherent of Henry IV.
    Your Majesty has been informed of what happened up to the departure from Dieppe. He left me behind there with the King, Your good brother. Since this the Bishop of Rome, who supports the rebel party which fills his cooking-pot, has sent a Nuncio to the Duke of Mayenne with Bulls of excommunication against all classes, whereby the adherents of the League have grown more insolent than ever. But nevertheless this has greatly promoted the interests of our religion. For all the subjects of the King who call themselves Catholic have been urging him to declare himself a Catholic, and in order to preserve his realm he might finally have been forced, in common with his subjects, to practise idolatry and go to Mass. Without these absurd so-called Bulls of excommunication he would have faltered from the right way. The King has faithful officials in his Parliament who have issued a warrant against the Papal Nuncio. This was actually done at the instance of the Papists themselves, who bethink them, as I hope, contrary to the opinion that I had of them, that God will cause the light of His Gospel to shine in this kingdom after it has been veiled for so long by Papal witchcraft. Madame, You will see the Papacy shrivel up sooner than You ventured to hope. We are about to destroy utterly the power and influence of the Pope by the creation of a Patriarch, with which the adherents of both religions are in sympathy. This is all that we can desire. There are still some bigots among us who are thought recalcitrant, but they will be brought to reason by fair promises which Your Majesty will understand. Louviers has been taken by surprise, and the Bishop of Evreux, one of the most obstinate partisans of the League, has been sent to Tours. There the wind is not favourable to the sacerdotalists. I am working in secret to have him arraigned, for such people as he are too dangerous, and I think that justice will not spare him. As for the true Christian Church, in all ways sit is making wonderful progress in France. The King of Spain, that old foe of Your Majesty and of the Crown of France, is molesting us on his side, for he is sending quantities of money and of troops under the Duke of Parma. The King of France cannot resist these without the help which I have promised him on the behalf and by the instructions of Your Majesty. The Duc de Mercœur is awaiting him, Parma, but the Prince of Dombes will give him a fitting reception and will give our men such stout support that they will hurl their foes to earth. The Prince of Piedmont has gone to Spain with a small retinue to obtain money there, that he may make war against our comrades in Geneva. If he succeeds in this the Genevans will be supported by their neighbours. The indisposition of the King has made us anxious, but, God be thanks, he is out of danger. He has received £10,000 which were at once utilized for expenses of war and exhausted in less than a day. Cash and military stores are short here. Owing to lack of funds no auxiliaries can at present be drawn from Germany. The Duke of Saxony has shown himself very cold to God’s cause. The Venetians put us off with fair words. Enthusiasm has waned everywhere. True believers in France rest all their hopes on Your Majesty. May it please You to give Your troops orders to advance without delay. It will be no small honour to You, Madam, to have overthrown the Roman basilisk, and to have led the Gallican Church to the paths of truth. As for me I shall for ever esteem myself happy to be able to serve You as ambassador at so critical a moment. The King can get no support from the Turk, who might have sent a sufficient force into France but for the menaces of the Sophi. In this connection the Venetians have made a mistake which has delayed matters. But notwithstanding this the King is about to renew the alliance with the Turk aforesaid, because he hopes for great advantage from it. What will result I know not.
    It was feared that the rebels would set up a King, which would not have been welcome to us, but the adjournment of the Parliament which had been summoned for May leaves us free to attend to our business undisturbed for a little while longer.
    I write nothing to Your Majesty about the bearer of this letter, for I hope and feel assured that You know as well as I that he has lost no time since he has been on the continent, and that he has fully justified my expectations. He will above all give Your Majesty reasons for hastening to give Your aid.
    I implore the Creator to grant You, together with good health, a very long and very happy life.
         Given at Caen on the 15th June 1591.
            Your most devoted and most obedient
                servant and subject,
                            WALSINGHAM.
    
226-227. English in Brittany
London
June 24, 1591
         Is the King of Spain dead?
    We have no special news here except that the Earl of Essex is recruiting 4000 men here to take to France and serve the King of Navarre.
    The City of London is sending some 60,000 ducats to France.
    Captain Williams, an Englishman, in garrison at Dieppe with 300 soldiers, has, with the help of the Governor of Dieppe, killed about 1200 Rouen men.
    The King has taken a strong fortress near Rouen, greatly to the detriment of the Rouen people. In Brittany the English and Navarrese have captured the strong town of Guingamp after heavy bombardment and storm. Most of the nobility of Brittany had taken refuge there.
    Lord Howard, who is in Spanish waters with the Queen’s ships, is said to have taken a despatch caravel coming from Peru and another large vessel of 800 tons from Ostend with masts, ropes and so on.
    The Earl of Cumberland, who set out with 8 vessels, and is, they say, on his way to India, appears to have met 11 vessels bound for Hamburg of Portugal. He looted them and took about 25,000 ducats worth of spices, among them 400 bags of pepper. All this he loaded on two of these vessels and took with him. It is a great loss for those concerned.
    The death of the King of Spain is much talked of here.

227. The Emperor forbids his Subjects to engage as Mercenaries
                            Prague
                            June 30, 1591
    His Imperial and Roman Majesty has, on request from the Spanish ambassador, issued fresh orders in all hereditary territories of His Majesty sternly forbidding any one of whatever rank to enter foreign service. Those who have entered service abroad must leave it at once and go home. The penalty is confiscation of all fiefs, and of property and possessions. Nothing particular has happened about our English alchemist. He is still behind stone walls, and his brother and servant and their wives are still detained in their residences and in rather poor circumstances.

227. The Turks will not move this year
                            Venice
                            July 21, 1591
    They write from Constantinople on May 10 that there is no sign of any galleys putting out, and the conjecture is that nothing will happen this year, for the Grand Turk will not grant money for an expedition of the kind from his own Treasury, but prefers to get it from other peoples’ purses. The Navarrese and English envoys have arrived at Constantinople with their presents, but they have not brought money enough to get a fleet fitted out, so it may be assumed that they will be unable to carry their point. But if they have reckoned on doing so they will find they are wrong, simply because the prolonged war with Persia attracts all the thought and attention of the Turks. They are assembling many men against Persia, and it is said that owing to lack of pay the Turkish troops are going over to the Persians.

228. English Defeat in the Straits of Gibraltar
                            Rome
                            July 24, 1591
    Last Wednesday the ordinary messenger arrived with some rather old letters from the Spanish Court. They mention that twenty English vessels, on their way with vast quantities of looted merchandise, were caught by the galleys in the Straits of Gibraltar. The royal fleet of many sail has gone to Brittany from the ports of Biscay. The Spaniards want to place as many troops as they possibly can in this province in order to get control of the seaboard towns. They think they can then easily hold them and make expeditions from there against England.

228-229. The English after the Fleet from New Spain: Essex ready to start  
Middelburg
August 1, 1591
background: Robert Devereux, second Earl of Essex, 1567-1601, the well-known favourite of Elizabeth. He lost his father early and was left in poor circumstances. At the age of ten he appeared at Court. His mother married the Earl of Leicester, and he went with him to Holland and took part in the fighting there. In 1587 he distinguished himself greatly in Drake’s Spanish expedition. He married the widow of Sir Philip Sidney. When Henry IV asked Elizabeth for help against the League, he was sent by the Queen to France and received a command there. Subsequently, on the suggestion of Sir Francis Bacon, his attention was given to foreign affairs. He discovered the plot of Doctor Lopez to poison Elizabeth. In 1596 he went with a fleet against Spain and fought there under Lord Howard of Effingham. In 1597 his expedition with Raleigh against Spain and the Azores failed, and he fell into disfavour with the Queen for a time, but was appointed Earl Marshal. In 1598 during a political discussion Elizabeth boxed his ears, but he was reconciled to the Queen by his uncle Sir William Knollys. In 1599 he became Governor General of Ireland and was at first successful, although later on he met with one reverse after another. Accordingly he concluded an armistice with the rebels and returned unexpectedly to London, where the Queen had him arrested. In 1600 he was tried and acquitted, but he strove in vain to regain the Queen’s favour. In this affair Bacon played a part which was strange rather then creditable. From this moment all malcontents gathered round Essex, who hatched a formidable conspiracy against the Queen. He was imprisoned and brought before a Court of his Peers, accused of conspiracy against the Queen, and condemned to death. Elizabeth was reluctant to ratify the sentence, but he was executed on the 24th February 1601              
    Letters from London of the 28th July announce that the Earl of Essex is ready to start and is due to reach Dieppe before the end of the month with 4000 foot and 200 horse. A conspiracy of courtiers against the Queen has been discovered. They are alleged to have intended to poison her. The accused have escaped and might well have lost their heads. The Spanish fleet has not turned up yet, for some of the English came upon two ships which had lost their way. They carried several thousand hides and some gold and silver. As it was not known where the other fleet was, vessels were sent from England to the Azores with provisions to meet the English ships there.
    Two distinguished noblemen are said to have gone to the market in London in broad daylight and to have cried out there with a loud voice: “Woe, Woe, Woe!”  Then they spoke to the people and told them to repent, for the Day of Judgment was at hand. One is said bitterly to have attacked the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Lord Chancellor. At this people wondered greatly and at length they were arrested, in order that they might be questioned as to why they did this. They answered they had heard Christ, who commanded them to do it. Others too should hear Him and do penance. The whole thing seems strange, and it appears as though God would now sit in judgment on these evil men. May the merciful God have pity upon us!

229. Essex ready to start
                            Antwerp
                            August 3, 1591
    Zeeland announces that letters from London of the 28th ult. state that the Earl of Essex is ready to embark. As for the conspiracy, some of Her Majesty’s courtiers are involved. The design was to poison the Queen and Don Antonio of Portugal. The accomplices were caught escaping, and two have already been quartered. The heads have been stuck up on poles on the bridge, by the side of those of forty others implicated in earlier plots against the Queen.
    The Earl of Cumberland has gone to Peru with 70 sail.

230-231. The English Ambassador urges the Turks to act
                            Constantinople
                            October 16, 1591
                            background: Ciccala, originally Scipione Visconte Ciccala, Capudan Pasha of the Turkish fleet, Grand Admiral and one of the most dreaded freebooters of the Mediterranean, was one of the numerous renegades in Turkish service. He was born at Messina and was alleged to have been captured by the Turks in 1561 at the age of twelve. His career in Turkey was brilliant, and he became an Admiral and a General against the Emperor, whose forces he defeated at Cerestes in 1596.
    The English envoy here has been informing the Sultan orally and in writing that the Pope and the King of Spain and their supporters are striving to set up a King of their own choice in France, in order with his help later on to attack the Sultan and the Queen of England with all their forces by land and by sea. With this in view the Queen seems to be stirring up the Poles and Muscovites also, and to have entered into an alliance with the King of Navarre, the Swede, Denmark, the German protestant Princes, the Prince of Florence and the Venetians to thwart the enemies of the Sultan. Therefore the Englishman, in the name of his Queen and of the King of Navarre, requests the Sultan, in accordance with his promise, to send help and not to lose the present favourable opportunity. Upon this the Sultan is said to have conversed with Ciccala in his new pavilion for two hours and to have decided to send the desired help to the King of Navarre. He is stated also to have commanded Ciccala to select a reliable person through whom the Sultan’s decision could be conveyed by autograph letter to the King of Navarre. Again much is said here about 300 galleys or more, but it is seen plainly and is the opinion of those who know that, even if the Sultan did not shrink from the expense, it would be impossible to fit out more than a hundred galleys. It is said, too, that Ciccala is content and promises the Sultan that this number will suffice. He means to sail with 100 galleys from here and 50 from Barbary and the Archipelago. They believe that this number will be sent by the Sultan to the assistance of the King of Navarre. But should the Spanish ambassador arrive with the much talked of thousands of Spanish crowns, a great change of plans will at once be made.

231. The Spanish Fleet gets through
                            Middelburg
                            October 17, 1591
    This week we have twice received letters from London to the effect that the English raiders are gradually coming home, bringing much loot with them. The fleet from New Spain is said to have reached Seville and to have fought its way through the English fleet. In the engagement two of the Queen’s ships have been lost and many others damaged. There is nothing in the tale about the Brazilian ships which they are alleged to have captured. This is good news which will cheer up the merchants here, after all the losses they have suffered. The Spaniards have recently taken seven English ships with fairly valuable cargoes.

231-232. But it has lost heavily and spices will be dear
                            Lisbon
                            October 19, 1591
    God be praised!  Perhaps before receiving this letter you will have heard by special messenger of what has happened to our Armada and the fleet from New Spain, which wintered in Havana. On the 8th inst. some of these ships, both from the Armada and from the fleet, and on the next day some more, came in here damaged and badly knocked about. General Don Alonzo de Basan came in likewise. Some of them are still missing, but perhaps have shaped a course for other ports. Of the Havana fleet 30 ships are still missing, but 18 have come in here and 30 to Seville. But altogether 70 ships left Havana. Our Armada had a collision with some English ships, but they soon took to flight. The Captain’s ship escaped badly mauled, though it is thought she sank afterwards. The flagship, one of the Queen’s best vessels, of some 60 guns, was surrounded and fired at all night till she surrendered the next day. But our ships hit each other too and two of them were sunk. However, the crew of one was saved. Immediately afterwards the fleet from New Spain came up. Of this 13 ships were already missing, and if our Armada had not cleared the English out of their way they would have had a very bad time. They intended to sail to Lisbon in company, but from the 26th to 29th September they met with such unprecedentedly bad weather that all the ships were separated. Some ran to Isola Terzera and San Miguel, and in sight of Terzera II ships were wrecked, among them the English ship, out of which, however, the guns had previously been taken. They have survived very great dangers, and it is hoped that some ships may yet have got to safety at San Miguel, or that the Armada has gone to Corunna. We cannot yet estimate the loss. The Havana fleet is not yet unloaded, and we must await the report of the casa de contractation in Seville. Altogether 14,000 arobas of cochineal seem to have been shipped. Nothing is known about ginger, as so many vessels have been lost. All the silver and gold for the King and the merchants has remained at Havana. The English captured some vessels close in here after they had weathered the storm, but their best haul was made between Santo Domingo and Havana. There they took a ship with a lot of silver on board, some say less than 500, others more than 700,000 reals. This will ill suit the people at Seville after the heavy losses they have been suffering for some years. It had been hoped that by means of the Armada the spices from Malacca which had been loaded up in 1589 would be saved and brought here. But the stuff has been left in the Azores. Those interested now want to bring it here in caravels, but as winter is at hand this cannot be done before next year. If no ship comes in from India till then, spices will get dearer every day. Cloves cannot now be got for 5000, but if the galleon comes from St. Thomas the price might fall again.

232-233. More Appeals to the Turks
                            Venice
                            October 26, 1591
    The English envoy is applying in the name of his Queen for the despatch of a big fleet next spring from Constantinople. The Turks have given the Englishman and the King of Navarre flattering promises, but it is assumed that little will be performed, if those who are concerned do not dip deep into their pockets; and then it will be very expensive.

233. A Lampoon on the Prince of Parma
                            Antwerp
                            November 9, 1591
    A pasquinade against the Duke of Parma was posted up on Change the night before last. Its purport is that His Highness is a traitor to the country and is seeking by all means to destroy it. His Highness is also in league with the Queen of England, to marry one of his sons to a cousin of the Queen so as to be able later with more ease to conquer the kingdom of Portugal. There are several other such accusations in the lampoon. Also there is a picture of His Highness. It is an evil affair which might cause disorder in the town, so the authorities have announced that the person who gives up the author of the lampoon to them will receive £100 Flemish, and any one who knows the author and does not give him up will be severely punished.

233. Outrage on a Spanish Envoy in England
                            Cologne
                            December 10, 1591
    From Holland we hear that the King of Spain has sent an envoy to the King of Scots. At his own desire this envoy was sent on by the King to the Queen of England, but he was beheaded in England, then his corpse was dragged through the streets and cut into four pieces. Upon this the Queen of England has declared the King of Spain to be her foe on water and on land, and has taken and confiscated some vessels which were going with grain to Spain from Amsterdam and the Baltic. So it seems that the war with Spain is beginning again and that there will be no end of trouble.

233-234. Perez and Saragossa
                            Rome
                            December 14, 1591
    Through the messenger from Spain who arrived on Tuesday we learn that the inhabitants of Saragossa have admitted Don Alonzo de Vargas and his troops into the town. With the exception of a few ringleaders the inhabitants have all obtained pardon. But it is not known where Secretary Perez, on whose account the whole rising has taken place, has escaped to.
    Juan de Vargas was brought to the Netherlands by Alva in 1567 and made President of the Spanish Court of Inquisition.
    For participating in the rising which took place at Saragossa because of the arrest of Antonio Perez the following were executed:  Juan de Luna, Don Diego de Heredia, Francisco de Ayerbe, Dionysio Perez, and Antonio de Fuerdes. Antonio Perez escaped, but his effigy was publicly burnt.

234. About half the Spanish Fleet is lost
                            Antwerp
                            December 14, 1591
    According to one letter from Seville about the Indian fleet only 34 ships have arrived there and 44 have either been lost or been captured by the English. Others again hear that 40 ships have come in and 40 are lost. However this may be, it is a very heavy loss which, both in Seville and in other places, will cause great confusion among traders; moreover, serious failures are to be feared.

234-235. Ships reach England safely
                            Antwerp
                            January 5, 1592
                            background: Thomas Cavendish (Candis), 1560 (?)-1592, a well-known freebooter and the second Englishman to sail round the world. He died on one of his voyages and was buried at sea.
    News comes from England that on the last day of December three vessels arrived in England with dried fish and wine. The ship Patty came from Candia to England in 56 days with 500 barrels of muscatel wine. Fifty-six barrels of Canary on a ship were taken by the English corsairs and brought to the west coast, but as they were incautious with a candle a spark flew into the powder and so 17 men were lost with everything on board. The English letters add that Lord Cumberland and another are arming in order to sail in five or six weeks. They say Captain Candis has been at sea for nine months and nobody knows anything about him.

235. More Raiding at Sea
                            Middelburg
                            January 16, 1592
    Some vessels have come over from England with cloth and other goods and many traders and passengers besides. They relate that the English took 7 ships of the Indian fleet, but most of it—40 ships—was lost in the storm. They say also that a well-known English nobleman has set sail with 5 armed ships and 800 men with the intention of visiting India and not returning home without considerable booty. Others are to follow in the spring. So the Indian vessels will suffer again. A few days ago 7 corn ships were lost in a storm and the crew of one of them was saved. Sea voyages are now very dangerous.

235. The Turks are inactive
                            Venice
                            January 17, 1592
    They say that the Turk has sold most of his stores of biscuit again. This is a token that o powerful fleet will sail. But at the same time he seems to have put a veto on further export of grain from his dominions.

235. No English Money left for France
                            Middelburg
                            January 24, 1592
    They write from England that a French envoy has again arrived with a fresh request for troops and money, but this will probably be almost entirely refused, as the Queen’s Treasury is sufficiently exhausted.

235. A Spanish Envoy for Constantinople
                            Venice
                            February 7, 1592
    Constantinople letters announce that the Secretary of the Spanish envoy, who is to go to Constantinople and conclude peace with the Turks, has obtained the required passport for his master, although the English ambassador tried hard to prevent it.

236. Financial Expedients in Turkey
                            Venice
                            February 7, 1592
                            background: The Turkish word chouse used to mean herald. In modern use it signifies non-commissioned officer.
    They write from Constantinople on January 4 that the Grand Turk summoned Captain Ciccala and asked him how many galleys he could get ready to sail this year. Ciccala answered that 200 could be got ready if they worked fast and hard, but the Grand Turk was not satisfied and was very insistent that he could not manage with less than 300. Ciccala replied that if His Majesty required so large a navy he must give him time and provide him with the necessary money. But as the Grand Turk does not desire to furnish this money from his Treasury he has issued orders for the creation of 1000 new Chouses, each one of whom is to pay 1000 ducats for the post. This money is to be employed for the new navy.

236. Attempt to murder James VI
                            Antwerp
                            February 8, 1592
    On the 5th inst. some London merchants came here by water through Zeeland, having left London on the 2nd. They report that before their departure news had reached London from Scotland that a Scotch Colonel by name Stuart, who was long in the service of the Holland and Zeeland governments, but from disloyalty to them joined the Catholic side, broke into the King of Scots’ palace with a large number of men intending to kill the King. But the King fled from one room to another till his guards and the people came to his aid. They killed some of the conspirators and took other prisoner. But there are those who think this was done with the connivance and consent of the King of Scots.

236-273. Escape of Bothwell
                            Antwerp
                            February 15, 1592
    English letters from London confirm that the Scotch Earl Bothwell with 50 troopers surprised the King in his palace. But the King escaped into his chamber. When the news spread in Edinburgh, armed citizens went to the castle, caught Bothwell and his accomplices, and hanged 14 of them. Bothwell, however, escaped, but is being closely pursued.

237. Sale of Turkish Sailors by a French Captain
                            Constantinople
                            March 21, 1592
    A few days ago some Turkish merchants arrived from different parts of their dominions. They relate that about a year and a half since a French yacht landed at Chios, as the Captain announced that he wished to proceed to Rhodes and thence to Alexandria. He took on Turkish sailors and they accompanied him. But when he was on the high sea he sailed to Messina, sold the Turks there and divided the profits among his own men. Ever since the Turks have been trying to get compensation for their loss, and applied in the first place to the French envoy. He referred the matter to the English envoy, who said he was here on behalf of his Queen only, and had nothing to do with French affairs. So the Turks are to bring up their complaint before the Divan in the next few days.

237-238. English Troops for the Low Countries
                            Middelburg
                            April 2, 1592
    This morning the English here announce that the Netherlands authorities have raised 26 companies of mercenaries for three months at their own expense. They are very well armed. The English have sent them 3000 soldiers all dressed in uniform. The Queen has presented each man with £1 above his ordinary pay. So it seems that both parties are striving for victory. To the King of Navarre these auxiliaries will be most welcome. Two thousand soldiers are being sent to Brittany from Dover and other places. It seems too that the King of Spain is making fresh preparations for the summer. The Earl of Cumberland has already brought in some loot. Another Lord is to sail shortly for the Indies and islands with 10 ships, but Drake may only raid as far as Lisbon, as Her Majesty will not   MISSING PAGES 238 & 239

240. Details of Ships captured
                            London
                            September 23, 1592
    Among the five vessels coming from Calicut the English have taken the Captain’s ship, on board of which were the Viceroy and his suite. The ship is of 1500 to 1600 tons and was taken near the Azores. This news was brought here about twelve days ago by a pinnace. She had left the ships behind, as they were putting the troops ashore and taking on fresh water. But they have not yet got their prize to England. In order to bring in the loot safely several ships have been sent to meet them, as there are 50 small Spanish vessels along the French coast. Of these five Calicut ships one has arrived, one is burnt, one captured, the fourth they say is lost, but the fifth is most anxiously expected.

240. More Details
                            Antwerp
                            October 3, 1592
                            background: Corvo is an island in the Azores.
    News reaches Zeeland from England that the Captain’s ship from Calicut has been brought in there. The English fought this ship for some hours and ended by agreeing to put the Viceroy, nobles and other passengers and the crew ashore on the island of Corvo. The English then sailed off with ships and cargo. Whether they have caught the other ship they were chasing as well, we shall learn later.

240. The Dutch may be annoyed
                            Antwerp
                            October 3, 1592
    They write from Zeeland that the English have taken three ships bound with mixed cargoes from Calicut to Holland, Zeeland and Hamburg. This will make bad blood between Holland, Zeeland, and England. The Queen of England will be requested to return ships and cargoes, but in the meanwhile much of the property will have been stolen and this will cause great loss to traders, as these three ships are valued at 300,000 ducats.

241. The Santa Maria at Portsmouth
                            Middelburg
                            October 9, 1592
    The English have brought the great Indian ship Santa Maria into Portssmouth. The warships have stolen half her cargo and have tried hard to sell the spices in all quarters, though they are forbidden to do so. But forbidding is no use, for Her Majesty and others cannot reduce the sailors to obedience. Most of the valuables on this ship will be lost. There were no pearls on board. They brought no Portuguese to England, so as to be able to pillage easier. They also burnt all bills of lading and ship’s papers. Pepper, cinnamon, cloves and indigo form the bulk of the cargo, but especially pepper, 8000 cwt. The English warships are mostly at home. They have taken another three ships which defended themselves. These also were pillaged.
    In England the plague is still raging. The Court and others of importance have left London for the country.

241. Distribution of Booty
                            Antwerp
                            October 10, 1592
    The Portuguese here have letters from London of the 26th ult. informing them that the Captain’s ship from Calicut has been brought to London and that cloves to the value of £6000 have already been sold off her. But the Queen has caused the sale of merchandise from this ship to be suspended in order that she may settle the price at which goods are to be sold, so as to obtain a higher rate. What arrangements have been made about the other two ships from Calicut is unknown.

241-242. Cargoes of the Santa Maria and Madre de Dios
                            Antwerp
                            October 11, 1592
                            background: The great ship Madre de Dios was taken by Sir John Burgh, 1562-1593. Flores is one of the Azores.
    Letters of the 9th inst. from Middelburg report that the English have again brought in 4 ships to England, one of which from Brazil is laden with sugar, one from St. Thomas with hides, and the other two, bound for the Spanish mines, with 1600 barrels of quicksilver. All this is valued at over 60,000 crowns. At Middelburg are 27 companies of English soldiers, waiting for the first favourable wind to sail to Brittany.
    The English are said to have brought a Calicut ship into Portsmouth and to have taken off her some 200 barrels. In these barrels were quantities of pearls and jewels, and gold in bullion. They have also got a large amount of spices, such as 4500 cwt. of pepper, cinnamon, nutmegs, mace and cloves. This alone would amount to over £200,000. The English have fought a good deal over the loot.
    London letters of the 2nd inst. state that the Calicut ship brought into Portsmouth by the English is named the Madre de Dios and is of 1500 tons with 36 brass guns. There were 90 sailors and numerous passengers on board. The value was far above a million, as the spices among the cargo had been valued at a million, and there were also on board gold costumes, a lot of Calicut linen and much Chinese silk. At first she fought with two English ships only, but when nine English ships with Lord Cumberland came up the Calicut ship had to surrender. Two hundred lives are said to have been lost on each side. The lesser people were put ashore on the island of Flores, and only sixteen of the most important were brought to England. The other ship which was burnt off the Azores was named the Santa Cruz.

242-243. The Queen requires the Booty to be returned
                            Antwerp
                            October 13, 1592
    London letters of the 10th inst. report that the Queen has given strict orders on pain of severe punishment for the return of all property off the Calicut ship brought into England. What has already been sold must be reported at Court and paid for. It is hoped that by this means the jewels and other valuables will reappear. It is thought also that the price of pepper will not come down, especially as the pepper on the Santa Cruz was lost.

243. 198 Deaths of Plague in London this week
                            Antwerp
                            October 18, 1592
    Letters from Middelburg report that the English soldiers were still there on the 16th inst. The departure of Colonel Norris with 8200 English soldiers for Brittany is to take place on the first fair wind.
    Last week 198 people died of the plague in London.

243. The Queen will soon be dead
                            Rome
                            November 7, 1592
    The report is circulating here that the Queen of England, owing to a suppurating fistula, cannot live beyond Easter.

243. Capture of Honduras and fourteen Peru Ships
                            Antwerp
                            November 8, 1592
    The latest letters from England report that the English have surprised and plundered the town of Honduras in Mexico, carrying off immense wealth. By special mail comes the announcement from London that the English are alleged to have taken 14 ships coming from Peru.

243. Spanish Fleets to stay in Harbour for the Winter
                            Lyons
                            November 12, 1592
    Letters from Madrid of the 26th ult. have just this moment come, and announce that King Philip has fallen ill of gout and has therefore not gone to Tarragona. His fleet, which was lying at the Azores, has returned to Lisbon, and the 2000 soldiers on board have been sent to Brittany. His Majesty has ordered the fleets due from Peru and New Spain to stay behind and winter there, so no fresh fleet is to be expected before next spring. Therefore the English will go still farther off to lie in wait for this fleet. They have snapped up and carried off another two ships bound from Seville to New Spain. They are valued at 200,000 crowns.

244. Execution of Saragossa Ringleaders
                            Rome
                            November 14, 1592
    The announcement comes from Spain that the chief ringleaders who took part in the revolt at Saragossa have died the death. Their entire property has been confiscated. The Secretary, Antonio Perez, on whose account the rising took place, is supposed now to be at Constantinople.

244. Probable Glut of Pepper
                            Middelburg
                            November 18, 1592
    Our only news here is that the two East Indian caravels taken by the English have been brought into Plymouth. Their value is estimated at above £200,000. The Viceroy with his whole family and all his fortune is on board. Ships still at sea are in the utmost danger, so that numerous Portuguese must be ruined, for far too many of their Brazilian ships have been taken. Very much pepper seems to have been on board and this will not suit the traders, as they already have 6000 cwt. stored in Amsterdam.

244. Philip has lost 4,000,000 at Sea this year
                            Middelburg
                            November 19, 1592
    Letters from London of the 17th inst. confirm that two ships from Spain to Peru with quicksilver have been taken by the English. It is said that the losses of the King of Spain at sea this year could not be paid for with four millions.

244-245. Funeral of the Duke of Parma
                            Antwerp
                            December 12, 1592
    The dead body of the Duke of Parma was brought with great pomp and solemnity from Arras to Brussels on the 10th inst. The soldiers and fraternities, all the clergy, Counts von Mansfeld, Arenberg, Barlaimont and de Fuentes, all the rest of the nobility and the members of the council moved out to meet the corpse with lighted lanterns in their hands. They escorted it to the castle chapel. We shall presumably hear soon what orders Fuentes has from the King, and whether Mansfeld retains the government provisionally till further orders from his Sacred Majesty. It is said that the Duchess of Savoy will be appointed Regent and Fuentes Captain-General of the army.

245-246. The Englishman, the Frenchman, and the Grand Vizier
                            Constantinople
                            January 27, 1593
                            background: François Savary, Comte de Brèves, 1560-1628, a well-known French diplomatist, who was made French ambassador to Constantinople in 1591 and used his great influence there to stir up the Sultan against the League, and succeeded in concluding a treaty between Turkey and Henry IV. He travelled all over the East. After the death of Henry IV he enjoyed the complete confidence of Marie de Médicis. He was nephew of the previously mentioned French ambassador Savary de Lanscomes, whom he had accompanied on his journey to Constantinople.
    The Englishman, who has hitherto been only an Agent, was lately appointed permanent Envoy by letters from his Queen, but without any presents for the Sultan. He declares that the vessel they were on was captured in company with several others by the Spaniards near the Straits of Gibraltar. This appears somewhat doubtful to people here, for the Englishman has used this excuse often before. But it is confidently maintained by others that twelve English galleons were taken by the Spaniards in the Straits of Gibraltar.
    Monsieur de Brève has long been struggling to get Monsieur de Lanscomes into his power, as he wanted to send the envoy to the King of Navarre. However, he had to await the return of Ciccala. Since this he has again taken a deal of trouble, and, to enhance his reputation, has spread abroad that Navarre is already King elect of France and has Paris and the whole country in his power. Moreover, his envoy has announced that he has reliable informants here from Christian countries. Thus finally on a report from the Hoja and from Ciccala, which has convinced the Grand Vizier too, an order has been issued by the Sultan that Lanscomes is to be taken out of the Black Tower and handed over to the Englishman, together with a despatch from the Sultan to Navarre. This happened sure enough on December 31. Immediately there appeared in front of the Englishman’s house a little unarmed boat with a single rower, and another boat somewhat bigger. The Frenchman did not want to embark, so he was tied with cords like a bale of goods and then hoisted with ropes and lowered into the boat and packed in. He implored the Englishman loudly and fervently to be sent away with his servants in the larger boat. He offered to pledge his honour and his faith, to take a personal oath, to leave his nephew and elder son behind as hostages that he would present himself before the King of Navarre. But the Englishman would have none of this, on the pretext that he had serious scruples against it, as Navarre had been declared a heretic, and he could not take the responsibility himself but must submit the matter to the Venetian Bailo. What negotiations took place in the affair is not known. All the same Lanscomes was despatched from here in the manner indicated, and his three sons, who remained together with their mother, for whose company on the journey he had begged with especial fervour, were detained here. His personal effects were subsequently transferred by his nephew to Brèves.
    The latter declares that 200,000 crowns will come to him shortly from the King of Navarre. But this is gravely doubted. He might, however, soon become Navarre’s French envoy here.
    So this is the dish which these three gentlemen, the Englishman, the Frenchman and the Grand Vizier, combined to concoct at their most recent consultations on the 13th December.

246-247. An Escort for the Spanish Fleet
                            Venice
                            February 12, 1593
                            backgound: Sir Martin Frobisher, 1535-1594, a renowned English sailor, who specially devoted himself to the discovery of the North-West passage. He visited Greenland repeatedly, and was despatched to Ireland as a Captain in Royal service against the Spaniards who had landed there. In the fight against the Armada he did exceptionally well, and was therefore knighted. In 1594 he took part in the relief of Brest under Sir John Norris. In this affair he received a mortal wound.
    The King of Spain has allowed the Portuguese to fit out ships to go and meet the Indian fleet. At Lisbon 12 galleons and other ships are being fitted out. They had been confined to these harbours because it had become known in Spain that the English pirate Drake, with Frobisher and other great corsairs and many ships, had sailed from England for Havana to pillage the fleet.

247. Drake preparing to start again
                            Antwerp
                            February 15, 1593
    English letters of the 23rd ult., which come to us from Zeeland, report that a Scotch Earl tried to make war on the King of Scots at sea, hoping to get much assistance from Spain. But as it did not come he gave up his attempt.
    The men of Dunkirk have been at sea with some well-found ships and have intercepted several vessels trying to pass between London and Zeeland laden with corn, wine and sugar.
    It was recently intended to send 2000 English pikemen and 800 musketeers from England to Brittany.
    Parliament is to sit in England within the next three weeks.
    Captain Drake is said to be intending to sail with six warships, and the Adventurers with 30 vessels.

247. More English Corn for Venice
                            Venice
                            March 5, 1593
    This week again an English vessel has come in here with 1000 cwt. of corn; others are to follow it every day.

247-248. Distribution of Booty
                            Antwerp
                            March 5, 1593
    Letters from London report merely that the meeting of parliament has been postponed till the month of March.
    The distribution of property carried in the Indian caravel just brought in is said to have been effected. Everything has not yet been sold but remains temporarily in the warehouses, because the sailors demand for themselves a quarter of the pepper and the Italians a sixth.
    The rising in the kingdom of Scotland has been quelled.
    Two thousand five hundred soldiers are again to be sent to France from England.

248. French Gifts for the Sultan
                            Constantinople
                            April 8, 1593
    Monsieur de Brèves announces that he is expecting a secretary and some other persons from Ragusa by land with presents for the Sultan. Then he is to be accredited here as Navarrese French Envoy.
    The Englishman has again been saying at the top of his voice that the boasted ship from his Queen is now at last due; it is already quite near; but now once more there is silence.

248. Plague still in London
                            Antwerp
                            May 2, 1593
    English letters of the 24th ult. state that the plague has not yet died out in London. This week 34 people have died of it.
    Parliament is prorogued and has consented to grant the Queen five millions in four years.
    Many warships with Adventurers have again put out, so that the sea will be very unsafe.

248-249. Spanish Success on the Garoone
                            Lyons
                            June 16, 1593
    Letters of the 22nd May from Madrid state that 12 ships from Biscay sailed up the river near Bordeaux, a town in France, to support a fortress there called Blois (presumably Blaze is meant) occupied by the Leaguers. On their entry into the river the Spaniards came upon six English warships which were strongly armed. They fought and cannonaded each other, and after the Spaniards had captured the flagship and the Captain’s ship, the two most important vessels, the English saw that they were done for. They set fire to their ships and burnt themselves. Of the Spanish ships two were lost but the crews were saved. The fortress mentioned above was reinforced and the Spanish ships returned home.
    Lisbon letters of the 15th May report that 40 ships have reached the Azores from India. They have twelve millions in gold, silver, precious stones and other valuables on board. Although the English raiders were on the look-out in force, the King of Spain has sent eight galleys, and two other big ships with 1200 soldiers and munitions for four months, to meet them and convoy this wealth safely home. Within a fortnight three more galleys and five other ships are to sail out in order to make the sea safe from the English.

249. English Envoy before the Emperor
                            Prague
                            July 13, 1593
    The English envoy had an audience with his Imperial Majesty last week at which he vindicated his Queen to His Imperial and Roman Majesty, inasmuch as injustice was being done her by the accusation that she was egging on the Turk against His Majesty.

249. 149 Deaths of the Plague in London last week
                            Cologne
                            July 23, 1593
    It is announced from London on the 17th inst. that 149 people died of the plague that week. It is feared it may spread further. The crops promise excellently, but notwithstanding this the load of corn has risen in price from £9 to £11 1/2, because cereals are very dear in Spain and Portugal.

249. The English Envoy leaves the Emperor
                            Prague
                            August 3, 1593
    The English envoy paid his farewell visit last Wednesday. His Imperial and Roman Majesty presented him with a gold chain worth 300 crowns, and he left for England the very next day, Thursday.

250. 454 Deaths of the Plague in London in a week
                            Antwerp
                            August 15, 1593
    Letters of the 2nd from London report that this Queen has again sent 2000 soldiers to Brittany. Two vessels sailing from England with corn have been taken by the Spaniards. On the other hand, the English have taken three ships with sugar bound from Brussels to Portugal. They had over 2200 cases of sugar on board. There are still more than 100 English ships at sea searching for loot.
    London letters of the 19th July record that during that week there had been 666 deaths in the city, of which 454 were from plague. Many people are leaving town in consequence and going to their country seats.

250. 220 English Fugitives at Middelburg.
                            Antwerp
                            August 22, 1593
    Zeeland letters dated iddelburg 19th inst. say that, owing to the great mortality in London, 220 people from that city have taken refuge there, and that English fugitives are arriving at other places also.
    As the King of Navarre has turned Papist and concluded an armistice for three months, the Queen of England is going to recall all her troops from France.

250-251. Sinan Pasha takes 140,000 Men to Hungary
                            Venice
                            August 20, 1593
    Letters from Constantinople of the 22nd ult. announce that Sinan Pasha marched out on the 19th ult. with 40,000 effectives, among them 15,000 janissaries. The Turkish Emperor in person, with his whole Court, accompanied him half a mile on his way. Sinan has orders to proceed to Hungary and Croatia to avenge the most recent defeat. On the way he is to be joined by another 100,000 men. Although the Venetian Bailo and the English envoy have exerted themselves to the uttermost to prevent this campaign, they met with no attention from Soliman, who is determined not to make peace with the Roman Emperor. Sinan pasha is said to be taking with him as prisoners the Imperial envoy, Herr von Kreckwitz, and his suite. However some assert that he has been released from custody but ordered to remove himself from Court at once and to leave the Ottoman dominions.
    Bailo or Baylo, Consul General and diplomatic representative of the Venetian Republic at Constantinople.
    Friedrich von Kreckwitz, Imperial ambassador at Constantinople. After the defeat of the Turks at Sissek in 1593 he was kept prisoner in the Seven Towers by order of Sinan Pasha, the Grand Vizier. At the beginning of the Turkish war against the Emperor he was led in chains behind the Turkish army and died in a dungeon at Belgrade early in December 1596.

251. Henry IV will do his best against Spain
                            Antwerp
                            September 12, 1593
    They write on the 9th inst. from the Hague that the Navarrese envoy has announced there and also to the Queen of England that now as before the King may be expected to spare no effort. He has received assurances to the same effect from the States General and the Queen of England, and supplies of munitions and military equipment will continue to be sent to France to drive the Spaniards out of the King’s dominions.

251. About 1000 Deaths of Plague in London weekly
                            Antwerp
                            September 25, 1593
    Letters of the 10th from London announce that there are about a thousand deaths of plague weekly in the city and outside it some five hundred, and there is no sign of any end to the mortality.
    The Queen intends to send about £30,000 for the English troops in Brittany. She also proposes to send one of her chief Councillors, Lord Buckhurst, to the King of Navarre with the information that she means to maintain the alliance. The Vidam de Chartres, who is still staying in England on behalf of the King of Navarre, may leave any day for Germany to visit the Protestant Princes.

252. The Plague abating
                            Antwerp
                            November 7, 1593
    From London in England we hear that the plague has somewhat abated. As corn prices have risen by one-third, further export is forbidden.
    Many Adventurers are now returning from the high seas with their vessels. They have accomplished little. Ships arriving in London from Spain with salt and wine report that the Adelantado has taken some Holland vessels.

252. Discovery of Copper in India
                            Venice
                            November 12, 1593
    Lisbon letters of the 2nd ult. report that the Portuguese have recently discovered an island in East India which is very rich in mines of copper and other metals. The ore contains up to two-thirds silver. This island is, however, so unhealthy that it is hardly possible to keep alive there for a year. They say the English tried to occupy the island, but it was so strongly held by the Portuguese that they had their journey for nothing.

252. 420 Deaths of Plague in London the first week in November
                            Antwerp
                            November 23, 1593
    English letters of the 9th inst. from London record that the sister of the King of Navarre is expected there. It is said that she has already started thither from Dieppe, but what she is after nobody knows.
    There were 420 deaths of the plague in London that week, and this is still a large number.
    Henry IV’s sister was Catherine de bourbon, 1558-1604, married in 1599 to Duke Henry of Lorraine, d. 1624.

252-253. Jesuit Conspiracy in England
                            Antwerp
                            January 8, 1594
    News comes from England of a fresh conspiracy to set up a King in England. Four Jesuits seem to have persuaded a young Earl of the Reformed religion by name Derby that the Pope had chosen him to be King of England. The Pope was minded to confirm him as King and send him a consecrated crown. The Jesuits thought that by means of a rising they could make this gentleman King. But the plot was discovered in time and the Earl and the four Jesuits, as well as the man who brought over the crown, were arrested. But nobody was executed and quartered except the person who brought the crown. The four Jesuits were respited because they abandoned their religion and turned Calvinist. The Earl, however, is still in prison, and we shall hear what happens to him.
    Ferdinand Stanley, fifth Earl of Derby, 1559-1594, a friend and patron of many poets and somewhat of a poet himself. From 1589 till 1594 he was patron of the company of actors formerly maintained by Leicester. He succeeded to his father’s dignities on the death of the latter, for instance as Lord of Man and the Isles. English Catholics residing on the continent tried to involve him in a conspiracy based on his claims to the throne through his mother, and sent Richard Hesketh and Holt the Jesuit to him. They promised him help from Spain. However Stanley handed Hesketh over to the authorities, so that he was executed at St. Albans in 1593.

253. Spaniards in Brittany
                            Antwerp
                            January 29, 1594
    They write from Zeeland that 5000 Spanish soldiers are said to have arrived in Brittany. They have stationed two galleys in the river before Bordeaux. The Queen of England cannot afford much assistance because of the rising which has taken place in Scotland, and it is possible that the Spaniards mean to retain the whole of Brittany. It is also announced that the King of Scots has turned Catholic and is depending on the Catholic party still left in the country. The King is also said to have had his cousin, the Earl of Bothwell, and several other Earls and gentlemen of the Reformed religion, killed. There is, therefore, great disquiet in the country, and the Queen has sent an Envoy to the King of Scots to find out what she is to expect.

254. A new Port in Peru
                            Rome
                            February 5, 1594
    A report from Spain of the 1st ult. states that, owing to the bad situation and dangerousness of the port of Nombre de Dios in Peru, the King has given orders for the construction of another port and town five miles off called San Philippo. This will be of great advantage to the trade with India.

254. Rebellion in Peru
                            Rome
                            February 15, 1594
    We hear from Spain that there has been a rising in the West Indies against the Spanish minister and that every one is killed. In addition to other hardships they tried to impose on the Peruvians a fresh tax of three millions in gold.

254. The King of Scots has turned Catholic
                            Cologne
                            March 3, 1594
    News received from Antwerp, England and Scotland is confirmed by letters from Amsterdam. Dr. Lopez has confessed under torture that he meant to poison the Queen. The King of Scotland is said for certain to have turned Catholic, but almost all his nobility and his subjects have risen against him, and the Queen of England is arming by land and sea to come to their aid. It is also stated that the General of Denmark has come to an arrangement with the Catholics in Scotland.
    Roderigo Lopez, d. 1594, a Jewish doctor from Portugal who had migrated to England. He had been living in England since 1559 and enjoyed the highest reputation. He attended Walsingham and Leicester, and in 1586 became chief Physician in Ordinary to the Queen and also a friend of Essex. During the stay of Antonio Perez in England he served as interpreter. For a reward of 50,000 crowns he was approached by Spanish spies to poison the Queen and Don Antonio. On the discovery of the plan Essex conducted the enquiry. Lopez was thrown into the Tower, arraigned and condemned to death. He was hanged and quartered at Tyburn on July 7, 1594. The Queen consented to his execution most unwillingly.

255. Will Denmark close the Sound?
                            Cologne
                            March 12, 1594
    The King of Spain sent a request to the King of Denmark for the closing of the Sound in order that he might more easily suppress his subjects in the Netherlands. The King of Denmark asked for time for reflection, and then said he would do it if the Hanse towns agreed. But the Hanse towns will not consent, and this the King of Denmark well knows.

255. The Lopez Conspiracy
                            Middelburg
                            March 17, 1594
    Great treason has been discovered in England, and some executions have already taken place; among these are Spaniards, Portuguese and Irish. Dr. Lopez may be tried any day. Letters to him have been found from the Count de Fuentes now in Brazil. He wrote to Lopez in the name of the King of Spain and procured him to kill the Queen, by poison or other means, for 50,000 crowns. The period between September and Easter was appointed for the project. Then he was to have the money. Lopez confessed this in prison himself. More arrests are being made daily, and one betrays the other. The whole affair will probably be crushed. Scotland is quiet again. They write that the Queen there has given birth to a son, and this delights the Scotch, but the English very much the opposite. The Queen of England’s ships have sailed for an unknown destination.
    Don Pedro Henriques de Azevedo, Count of Fuentes, 1526-1610, became Governor of the Netherlands in 1594, and was succeeded by Archduke Albert. He took part in Biron’s conspiracy against Henry IV.

255-256. English Raiders off Sicily
                            Rome
                            March 19, 1594
    Letters of the 2nd inst. from Palermo report that three well-armed English raiders are in Sicilian waters, and the island galleys dare not face them so that navigation there is very unsafe. Besides many other ships they attacked a big cornship from Ragusa, and after fighting with it for a long while and killing 50 people, they finally captured it, and cut off the heads of the Captain and two monks.

256. English Raiders in the Gulf of Lyons
                            Venice
                            April 8, 1594
    They write from Genoa that all messengers and postilions from Spain are being stopped and this no doubt suits the King of Spain very ill. By sea they have received letters of March 4 from Madrid reporting that the crossing is very dangerous, as the English raiders are in the Sea of Provence plundering and capturing.

256. English chasing Spanish Merchantmen   
                            Venice
                            April 8, 1594
    Letters of the 26th March from Genoa report that a vessel laden with wool and oil arrived there from Spain on the 22nd March. This vessel says that the fleet from New Spain has reached Havana safe and sound, and that 19 English ships are in those waters after the Spanish ships. They do not let a single ship pass, and have set fire to five villages and the whole country-side on the island of Santa Margarita. They then sailed to Sardinia for shelter. At Cadiz some vessels have left Spain for India. They are convoyed by 8 galleons and 6 pinnaces.

256. Spanish Fears for Portugal
                            Rome
                            April 30, 1594
    Madrid reports on the 3rd inst. that the King of Spain has learnt that the Queen of England is arming a fleet for Don Antonio, so the King has sent 40 Captains and 5000 horse to Portugal. Ships are being detained everywhere in order that they may offer resistance.

257. The English burn Vigo
                            Venice
                            May 6, 1594
    We receive letters of the 26th March from Madrid stating that the English corsairs are doing much damage to the people along the coast of Galicia, and that injury from them is dreaded daily, as they carry off all vessels. The 9000 soldiers intended to embark for Italy can therefore not be sent off. Four English ships which arrived in the port of Vigo in Galicia expected to find the Indian fleet which had put in because of contrary winds, but as they did not get these vessels, they set the port on fire and sailed away. The English corsairs also attacked a Venetian ship, La Stella, but she escaped with great difficulty to the shelter of a fortress. The English also drove ashore a Lisbon ship laden with war stores.

257. Prince Henry’s Sponsors
                        From Groningen Camp
                        June 30, 1594
                        background: The child was Henry, Prince of Wales, 1594-1612, elder brother of King Charles I.
    The envoys of the King of Scots who have come here to invite the States General to stand sponsor to the King’s child have been visiting His Excellency at Groningen camp. In combination with the Magistrates he gave the Scotch envoys a magnificent banquet last Sunday and presented each of them with a gold chain worth 1000 Rhinegulden. What the baptismal gifts will be of course we shall hear. Herr von Brederode and other gentlemen have been deputed to accompany the envoys to Scotland.

257. 40,000,000 from Indian for Spain
                            Venice
                            July 8, 1594
    We hear from Spain that the King of India is dead and has left His Sacred Majesty of Spain forty millions in gold. The Indian fleet would seem to be bringing more wealth than ever before, to wit:
    Twenty-five millions in gold of which 12 millions are for His Majesty, and 13 for private individuals.

258. Turks at Aden
                            Venice
                            July 15, 1594
    By order of the Sultan the Pasha of Cairo is said to have sent many ships by the Red Sea to Aden, and there they captured some Portuguese fortresses in order to stop navigation by the Portuguese to the East Indies, and to bring to Cairo, Alexandria and Venice the spices which have hitherto been carried off to Lisbon.

258. Prince Henry’s Sponsors again
                            The Hague
                            July 21, 1594
                            background: Large handsome bumpers of silver or gold were then called “heads.”
    On the last day of this month our envoys are to start for the christening in Scotland. They are:  Herr von Brederode with three other gentlemen, Herr von Gröningen, Monsieur de Sainte-Aldegonde and one more gentleman from the Hague. At the Hague two double or gold heads are being made, each one costing 6000 Rhinegulden. They are to take these with them and give them to the child as a christening present.

258. More English Captures at Sea
                            Middelburg
                            July 21, 1594
    News comes here that the English have sailed to Brittany with some warships to relieve Brest. The English have once more brought into Plymouth a big spice vessel of 900 tons and three other ships as well. In the West Indies they have sunk two ships, saved the cargo and thrown the crews overboard.

258. Precedence at Sea
                            Rome
                            September 3, 1594
    The disputes which have so long prevailed among Christian powers about precedence at sea have now been settled. Only the Pope and the King of Spain can sail their galleys with colours flying. If they meet they must salute each other. All other nations must yield precedence to these two.

259. The Spaniards take Brest
                            Antwerp
                            September 3, 1594
    This evening comes news from Middelburg that the Spaniards in Brittany have captured Brest and destroyed the English warships, taking two of them. They are now lords and masters of this port, and the English will have a bad neighbour, for with a fair wind they can cross from thee to England in 24 hours. With their galleys they will be able to visit it daily and loot. No doubt an Armada will be sent against England from Spain as well.

259. The Dutch go to India
                            Antwerp
                            September 3, 1594
    At Amsterdam, besides the three ships which recently sailed for India, three other large vessels are being got ready, also to go to India, in order to see if they can arrange a harbour for Indian trade, and somewhat diminish the King of Spain’s traffic with the East Indies. If they find a good passage it will be very profitable for this country. Towards this voyage the States General have granted 2000 Rhinegulden and ten of the chief men of business the same sum. If the voyage is successful, the money will be repaid to the State General.
    This was the Van Verre Co., founded in 1593 and at the time the most important Dutch trading company in the Indies. It was enlarged in 1598 by fusion with smaller companies.

259. The North-East Passage
                            Antwerp
                            September 24, 1594
    It is reported from the Hague that one of the vessels making for India has come back to say she has found the passage behind Norway. The sailing is very good there, but one must be careful to choose the months of June, July and August, as at all other times the channel will be found to be icebound. Therefore three ships will go there from here next November. This will give the Spaniards and Portuguese on their voyages a nasty shock.

260. The Danzigers fear to put to Sea
                            Danzig
                            October 15, 1594
    We have no further news from Spain about the ship recently lost. The English are again strong at sea, and people here have requested our King to take measures against them. So the Queen of England has been written to and her answer is awaited. Hardly any one in our town is spared by the raiders now, and it grows more and more dangerous to put to sea. God render it better.

260. Rumours of Peace
                            Antwerp
                            October 15, 1594
                            background: Archduke Ernest of Austria, 1553-1595, passed most of his youth at the Spanish Court. In 1592 he was suggested to the French Leaguers by Philip II for the Crown of France, but was rejected. In the same year he became Governor of the Netherlands, but did not make his entry till 1594. His best efforts for reconciliation in the Netherlands failed owing to the strong interest which the Spanish nobility had in the continuation of the war. As the French troops were entering the Netherlands the Archduke suddenly died.
    They say for certain that the Queen of England has despatched a person of distinction to His Serene Highness Archduke Ernest, and that he has arrived at Ostend, and at once sent a herald to Brussels to obtain a pass from His Highness in order to appear before His Highness on his Queen’s behalf. Letters of the 10th inst. from Middelburg state that a German mission of unknown origin has been with the Queen of England and has passed on thence to the King of France. It might therefore be presumed that this is preliminary to negotiations for peace. May the Lord God in His graciousness grant it!

260-261. More English Prizes off Central America
                            Antwerp
                            October 22, 1594
    English letters of the 15th inst. from London report that the English have taken two vessels, one of them off Mexico with over 200,000 crowns in goods and cash on board.
    Herr von Brederode and the other envoys who stood sponsor to the young King of Scots have arrived in London. Each of them has been presented by the King with a fine horse and a gold chain. They are to leave for Zeeland again in a week.

261. The West Indian Fleet fears to leave Havana
                            Lyons
                            October 27, 1594
    A messenger from Spain for Italy rode through here just lately. He brings news that the Indian fleet with its very valuable cargo is to winter at Havana. It cannot get out, as English ships are there. They are said to have carried off 15 small vessels from New Spain containing leather and other goods.

261. No Fleet no Pay for Spanish Troops
                            Antwerp
                            November 5, 1594
    The English embassy to Brussels is daily expected, but its object is unknown. Some say the Queen desires permission for her subjects to come every four months to this country with their woollen garments and English cloths and sell the goods here. The upshot of the business will appear later no doubt.
    Spanish letters announce that the fleet from New Spain and Peru will not come in to Seville before May. This is bad news for this country, as it will be impossible to pay the troops here and maintain discipline.

261. Preparations for the North-East Passage
                            Antwerp
                            November 6, 1594
    On the last day of last month the envoys came back to the Hugue from Scotland. They tell of all the splendid ceremonies at the christening and of the great honour paid to the English and Low Countries representatives.
    The ships which are to sail along the new-found passage to India are being energetically equipped and will commence their voyage before Christmas. There are three big ships and a small yacht. It is said that there are to be about 100 men on each ship. The States General are providing the traders with guns and ammunition.

262. The Queen celebrates her Reign of Thirty-Six Years
                            Cologne
                            December 15, 1594
    From London in England come letters of the 29th ult. saying that the Queen there gave a great banquet on the anniversary of her accession thirty-six years ago. On that day three flags were presented to the Queen taken by her troops from the Spaniards in Brittany.
    We hear from Scotland that the King has caused the rebels under Spanish influence to be executed, nobles with the sword, commoners bribed by the Spaniards with the rope.

262. Six Papal Ships captured
                            Antwerp
                            January 18, 1595
    We hear by letters of the 3rd inst. from London that Captain Drake with another knight named Hawkins is to fit out a strong naval expedition, composed of ten Queen’s warships and forty warships altogether, as well as two yachts. From Zeeland we have news that over 100 vessels with general cargo and salt have come there and to Holland from Spain, Portugal, France and England, and that still more are expected.
    They write from England that their warships have captured and taken into Flushing six Papal warships. As the crews give each other no quarter, it is to be presumed that the crews of these vessels have all been killed.

262. Moratorium in Spain
                            Rome
                            February 11, 1595
    Spanish letters of the 1st January confirm that His Majesty on request of the traders has forbidden all payments at fairs and other places of business till after the arrival of the Indian fleet, on condition however that those who owe bills and demurrage fees must pay interest on them monthly. It is thought that this measure would not have been resorted to unless there had been a risk of many failures in Spain and elsewhere.

263. An Anglo-Turkish Fleet
                            Venice
                            February 17, 1595
    From Genoese letters we gather that English vessels laden with metal have again put into that port and are awaiting further arrivals. In a short time thee vessels are to meet the corsair Amurad and then the combined force is to join the English Armada sailing this spring to lie in wait for the Indian fleet.

263. French Ships preparing also
                            Antwerp
                            February 22, 1595
    About eight sail of the English fleet are said to have proceeded to Spanish India. The great Armada will not start out till next month—March—and seven ships are going to the coast of Brazil. The French also are arming heavily and much raiding is to be feared. There will be little trade by sea this summer.

263. Why cannot the Pope help to pay for the War?
                            Rome
                            March 15, 1595
    The King of Spain has had the Pope informed that he does not oppose the pardoning of the King of France, and that the Pope should act as he thinks best for the honour of God and Holy Church. Nevertheless His Majesty is resolved to wage unceasing war against Navarre. Concerning help from the King against the Turks, His Majesty asks to be excused, owing to the delay of the Indian fleet, and begs the Pope to draw temporarily on the Treasury of the Church in the fortress here till the above-mentioned fleet comes in.

263-264. Perhaps the English will stay at home
                            Antwerp
                            April 6, 1595
    Since messengers can no longer cross by Calais but must sail to England from Zeeland, few letters have been coming over here. Also we do not hear that the English Armada has started. It is rumoured that the Admiral of England is opposing Captain Drake, and that for various reasons the Queen will not let the fleet put out. It would be excellent if the English fleet stayed at home, for then the Indian fleet would get to Spain more safely.

264. More doubtful Peace Rumours
                            Antwerp
                            April 22, 1595
    It is generally said here, and generally hoped too, that the States General of Holland and Zeeland will part from France and England and make a separate peace with the Provinces of this country. However, they refuse to negotiate with the Court. But we cannot yet make out how this peace can be concluded, for if the States General quarrel with England they will have great difficulty in getting rid of this Queen’s troops from Holland, Zeeland and Flanders. We shall soon learn whether these peace negotiations are continued or not. Some declare they have received letters from Zeeland to say the English Armada has already put out. In good time we shall hear whether they are after the fleet from India. The Lord protect it from the English!

264-265. Anxiety for the Spanish Fleet
                            Antwerp
                            June 3, 1595
    On the 29th ult. the usual mail from Seville arrived here. It brings letters of the 17th April. Some people have received letters from Seville via Madrid dated 29th, sent after the ordinary mail. These letters announce that on the 19th ult. a caravel arrived at Seville with the report from the Indian fleet. It brought news that this fleet sailed from Havana on the 13th March and the caravel sailed in company for nine days. Then it came alone to Seville to bring the report. We hope to God that the fleet has arrived now this very moment, and suppose that its arrival will be at once announced here by messenger. The day before yesterday letters of the 23rd ult. were received from London saying that the English warships had picked up and brought into England a vessel from the India fleet which has lost its way. These letters also announce that the whole Indian fleet has sailed from Havana and that it is believed it will reach Seville.

265. Sacrilege by an Englishman at Rome
                            Rome
                            June 17, 1595
    During a procession held yesterday to initiate the forty hours’ prayer in St. Agatha’s church a young Englishman of 25 smote the Sacrament out of an Archbishop’s hand with such force that it fell to the ground and the crystal of the monstrance wounded the hand of the criminal. A crowd at once gathered, dashed burning torches in his face, and tried to kill him, but the Archbishop restrained them. The Englishman has been thrown into prison.

265. Pernambuco taken by the English
                            Antwerp
                            June 24, 1595
    News comes here by letter from Amsterdam and Middelburg that the English and French have taken the town of Pernambuco in Brazil. They are building a large fortress there and this will cause consternation in Spain. It is also announced from Middelburg that a Calicut vessel has put in there which, together with several others, has been pillaged by the English.

265. The Englishman burnt
                            Rome
                            June 24, 1595
    Last Monday the Inquisition handed over to the secular power the Englishman who, as already mentioned, insulted the Sacrament. On the Tuesday following he was bound to a cart, his right hand was cut off and he was then taken through the town. He was frequently smitten with lighted brands by the executioner and finally burnt alive in the Piazza del Capitolio. During his examination he named several other knaves heretical like himself; therefore the Pope gave orders that for the avoidance of future outrages during the processions before the forty hours’ prayer four Swiss are to walk as guards by the Sacrament.

266. English Cloth at Constantinople
                            Venice
                            July 28, 1595
    Some English vessels heavily laden with cloth have arrived at Constantinople. This will do much damage to the Venetians, as, being short of money, the English will let their wares go very cheap.

266. Spanish Designs on Ireland
                            Antwerp
                            August 5, 1595
                            background: 
    This refers to the great Irish Rebellion led by Hugh O’Neill, Earl of Tyrone, and lasting till after the death of Elizabeth. Sir Henry Bagenal tried to crush it in vain, O’Neill beat the English in numerous engagements of which that at Yellow Ford in 1598 was the most important. His assistant in the struggle was his brother-in-law, O’Donnell. In the course of the war O’Neill sent envoys to Spain to urge Philip II to furnish help. The Queen sent Essex to Ireland to suppress the rising. He frittered his forces away and had to conclude an armistice with the Irish. To him this was fatal. The next English commanders, Mountjoy and Carew, were more successful. In 1601 the Irish received reinforcements from Spain, but they were shut up in Kinsale. The Irish met with serious reverses and the Spaniards returned home. O’Donnell was sent to Spain to get help, but died there of poison. After capture by storm of the fort of Dunboy the revolt came to an end. The English leaders devastated the country terribly. O’Neill and O’Donnell’s brother were pardoned by James I and their confiscated properties were restored to them.
    Some people here have received letters from London declaring that the Irish have defeated some ten thousand English—but this seems rather a lot. It is thought, too, that the King of Spain’s fleet, now being equipped in Spain, is to sail in the direction of Ireland. Therefore Captain Drake and his Armada are not to leave England. What there is in this time will show.
    Some also have letters of the 24th ult. from Lisbon to say that the English in Brazil have taken 700 cases of sugar, some 1200 cwt. of Brazil wood, and a quantity of pepper, all coming in a vessel from Calicut. A very ruinous business. May the Lord repay each one his loss and avert such rapine in future.

267. Loot from Brazil
                            Cologne
                            August 10, 1595
    Amsterdam letters of the 5th state that four vessels have arrived there from Lisbon and that more are daily expected from San Lucar. These letters also announce that the English have plundered Pernambuco, a thing which very little foresight would have prevented, as it would have been easily possible to concentrate a defence force of several thousands in the place. The English have already brought part of the loot to London. This is why pepper and other spices, as also linen, sugar and Pernambuco wood are disposed of very cheap, so that these English are spoiling trade in all direction.

267. Spain, the Philippines and Japan
                            Rome
                            August 12, 1595
    The Spanish Court has been informed that the Emperor of Japan offers to maintain close friendship with the Governor of the Philippines and the King of Spain. He will also admit the Barefooted Friars and the Jesuits to his dominions.
    The Governor of Peru has discovered a new country inhabited by very short men with long beards. He has sent some of them to Spain.

267. Spanish Raid in Cornwall
                            Antwerp
                            August 23, 1595
    They write from Zeeland that some Spanish warships with about 1000 soldiers on board have raided Cornwall in England from the sea. They have pillaged and burnt some houses there and carried off many people. Now if the King of Spain’s well-equipped Armada should put to sea this same summer, people in England will have to look out for themselves. So Captain Drake and his fleet are staying at home to make sure which way this Spanish Armada is going.

268. Drake sails for Havana
                            Cologne
                            October 12, 1595
    We have news here that Captain Drake with 60 ships has sailed for Havana. He has taken with him masons, stones and lime, in order to land 4000 men at Havana and build a fortress to stop the King of Spain’s navigation.

268. Chinese and Japanese Christians at War
                            Antwerp
                            November 18, 1595
    The Queen of England is hurriedly raising troops and has already sent warships to Ireland because she fears that the Armada prepared in Spain might make a descent upon Ireland, as the King of Spain has had a quantity of arms purchased at Milan and other places.
    Ships coming from Portugal confirm that the Christians on the island of Japan are waging war against those in China. This suits the Portuguese Indies excellently.

268. Preparations for War in Ireland
                            London
                            December 30, 1595
    The Queen is arming vigorously. From this city alone she has demanded 20,000 men and 20 full-armed ships, but we hope to get off with 6-8000 men and 15 warships. The Queen is having all her ships armed, and her whole people throughout the kingdom has been assembled on horse and on foot.

268-269. Preparations for War in Ireland
                            Antwerp
                            January 19, 1596
    Letters from London of December 30 state that there is much fear in England that the Spanish Armada is aimed at the country. So the whole land is astir to arm every man. The King of Scots is doing the same. He has commanded his people to provide themselves with arms. Also he is having his seaports well garrisoned and equipped with all military requirements. In the meanwhile efforts are being made to crush the rising in Ireland. They have heard in England that the Eastern Hanse towns are despatching ships to Spain with all sorts of materials for shipbuilding. So Lord Cumberland is to sail out with some warships and lie in wait for and capture these Baltic vessels. For the English propose to prevent them from equipping ships and crews.

269. Brescian Munitions for Spain
                            Rome
                            January 20, 1596
    By letters from Brescia we learn that the agents of the King of Spain have made a contract with the artisans of the town for 20,000 gun barrels and 7000 musket barrels among other things. Also they have ordered 5000 cuirasses. The Brescia workmen are to deliver 2000 articles weekly. In one place belonging to Brescia the Spaniards have ordered 30,000 balls of assorted calibres.

269. Spanish Trade with London never greater
                            Antwerp
                            January 27, 1596
    They write from London on the 12th inst. that a severe gale blew that that week, in consequence of which a ship called the Samaritan bound for France with a cargo worth £12,000 was lost with all hands.
    For 25 years past not so many figs and raisins nor so much wine have come from Spain to London as just now. There are 7000 barrels of wine in stock and over 22,000 baskets of raisins, not counting the blue ones. The fall in prices is very great.
    Letters from Middelburg of the 25th announce that some ships have recently come from Portugal which were only 13 days on the voyage. They report that the Spanish Armada with 8000 men has sailed to look for Captain Drake at Havana.

269-270. Drake at Havana
                            Amsterdam
                            January 27, 1596
    News reaches here that Captain Drake has arrived at Havana. They are greatly annoyed at this in Spain and 28 ships are sailing there from Portugal, as well as some from Spain. So there may well be blows in that locality, and the Queen of England will doubtless send warships and troops there.

270. Drake at Havana
                            Antwerp
                            February 10, 1596
    Confirmatory information comes from England of Captain Drake’s capture of two forts at Havana. Another sixteen warships with troops and all sorts of munitions have been sent out to him from England. Whether they will arrive soon enough and whether also the Armada of the King of Spain will be able to drive Drake out of Havana time will show.

270. Chinese Gold inaccessible
                            Venice
                            February 16, 1596
    The gold-bearing island found a little while ago by the Spaniards in the Kingdom of China seems to be uninhabitable owing to its poisonously unhealthy climate, so that it is utterly impossible to dig gold mines there.

270. Rebellion in Ireland
                            Antwerp
                            February 17, 1596
    England is quite, but in Ireland, owing to the Earl who lately rebelled, there seems to be a rising. He is presumably acting in concert with the King of Spain, so the English are anxious and are again sending troops to Ireland to lay hold of the rebels and drive them out entirely. The English are not the least afraid of the King of Spain having any designs on Ireland or trying to introduce troops into the country. Lord Cumberland has already sailed with some ships to meet the Spaniards.

270-271. English driven back from Porto Rico and Nombre de Dios
                            Madrid
                            February 24, 1596
    Definite news came from Seville yesterday that, of the five ships sent to Porto Rico for the 2 1/2 millions left behind by the last fleet, three have reached San Lucar in safety with the whole of the gold. In Guadeloupe harbour not far from Porto Rico they met the English fleet, which was expecting five of its own ships there. Seeing the Spanish ships they took them for their own, and therefore sent a vessel to meet them. This vessel our people took, and thus learnt that the English meant to sail to Porto Rico. So our vessels made all haste to Porto Rico, to put it in a fit state of defence. This was done. They hid the ship containing the gold, together with the captured English ship and two of their own, in the harbour, thus blocking the entrance. And what is more they so strengthened their guns and troops that, when the English came along seven days later, they met with such a reception that the General who accompanied Drake in the fleet together with 200 others was killed, and the English had to sail fruitlessly away. The Spaniards only lost 11 men. The English made off towards Nombre de Dios, but that place has been warned, as have all others, and it is hoped that they will all offer sufficient resistance.

271. English driven back from Porto Rico and Nombre de Dios
                            Madrid
                            March 7, 1596
    Yesterday letters from Seville report that the English fleet passed near Nombre de Dios, which was awaiting them without anxiety. The women and children and the chief valuables had been sent for safety into the country round about. The Spanish fleet has arrived unharmed in New Spain.

271. The Turkish Fleet will soon be ready
                            Venice
                            March 15, 1596
    Fresh letters from Constantinople of the 19th of February announce that there is being no delay over the equipment of the 150 galleys which are to put to sea, as the Sultan has heard that Captain Drake is at Havana, and means to establish himself there. So the Spanish Armada will have enough to do to defend those places.

272. Drake has not really taken Havana
                            Rome
                            March 16, 1596
    Drake appears not to have taken Havana harbour, but the Seville merchants for their own profit say he has, in order to raise the prices of certain articles. strict enquiry is therefore being made for the originators of this fictitious report.

272. The Sultan to go to Adrianople
                            Venice
                            March 22, 1596
    Constantinople letters of February 25 confirm that the Turkish Emperor is definitely moving to Adrianople. The English envoy is to accompany him there, and the Sultan has assigned him 500 sequins travelling expenses.

272. Turkish Preparations
                            Venice
                            March 29, 1596
    Letters from Constantinople announce that the Grand Turk and the English envoy are expected daily. Ninety well-found galleys have already been launched from the Arsenal. On land the Grand Turk is raising what troops he requires. He seems to have assembled a large number, but they are only an untrained rabble. An English ship has arrived at Constantinople containing many handsome presents sent by this Queen to the Grand Turk and his Pashas. He is being requested also to use all possible diligence in arming strongly at sea against the King of Spain.

272-273. English Fleet for the West Indies
                            Amsterdam
                            March 30, 1596
                            background: Sir Francis Vere, 1560-1609, General of the English troops in the service of the United Netherlands. He did very well in this capacity.
    They write from England that great preparations are being made there, and that France, Scotland, Denmark and even the Netherlands are taking their share. Drake appears to be on the island of Cuba. The ships fitting out in England are to be ready in a week, and are taking a quantity of stone and lime. Many nobles are said to be accompanying them. From every English Company in Holland and Zeeland one-third of the seasoned soldiers are being taken and replaced by fresh men from England. Colonel Vere is going too. The Lord Admiral, Lord Cumberland and Lord Essex are coming from England, and it is conjectured that 25,000 soldiers will be embarked.

273. Some Money reaches Spain
                            Rome
                            April 6, 1596
                            background: See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 163, Drake.
    Letters of March 8 from Spain relate that three azabras have put into the port of Seville with 2 1/2 millions in gold and 500 barrels of cochineal off the flagship, which should have got there last year with the Indian fleet. These vessels report that five royal ships fell in with two of Drake’s ships neave Porto Rico and took one. They learnt from the sailors that this Drake is not far off there, and means to return to Porto Rico. Three of our ships sailed there also, but two of them were taken by Drake and burnt. Expecting to capture the port, he met with such resistance from the inhabitants that he lost 400 men.

273-274. Calais in Distress, Ireland in Rebellion
                            Middelburg
                            April 11, 1596
    The wife of the Governor of Calais together with forty other women has come to Flushing to ask for help. A Company of English mercenaries started at once, and 12 warships have got ready to sail there. The port is to be kept open for four or five days so that the inhabitants may procure help from here and from England, as the town is of great importance to both parties. More Spanish soldiers are said again to have arrived in Ireland to keep the disturbances there afoot. The Queen also has sent more soldiers there. From Amsterdam letters of the 13th inst. we learn that the Cardinal is besieging the town of Calais, and that orders have been given for help to be sent there. The ships too have been got ready with all speed, and Count Maurice went on the 11th from the Hague to Zeeland to see the fleet start. The ships that are being sent by the city of Amsterdam should also putout any day, and the entire fleet of English, French and Netherlanders is said to be already assembling. The States General are despatching troops from Flanders as well, and are sending the Count of Solms there to look closely after things.
George Everard, Count of Solms, Lord of Münsterberg, 1568-1602, second son of Count Ernest of Solms-Hohensolms. He entered the military service of the Netherlands in 1583 and was put in command of the Netherlands troops in Zeeland in 1587. In 1591 he was made Governor of Hulst. His later campaigns were unsuccessful, but owing to his relationship with the Orange family he retained his command and was frequently employed in raising troops in Germany.

274. Calais surrenders to Cardinal Albert of Austria
                            Antwerp
                            April 15, 1596
    After Cardinal Albert of Austria had besieged the town of Calais and taken two forts, the surrender of the town was arranged as follows:
    The citizens retain lives and property and pay a sum of money. The Cardinal can bring troops into the town at his pleasure, and the Governor and his soldiers at once retire to the castle. He is to leave all munitions in the town, and is to be allowed six days’ grace. If in that period he is not relieved, he must surrender the castle also to the Cardinal. On hearing these tidings the great bell was rung here, and the Te Deum sung in the church. The Queen of England is said to be at Dover with several thousand men, and the loss of the town of Calais will prevent her fleet from putting to sea.

274-275. The Surrender due to Treachery
                            Amsterdam
                            April 20, 1596
    The siege of Calais does not please many people, and to judge by reports it would seem to be lost, for it was sold long since. The Governor has offered no resistance, and has let the enemy advance as he pleased. It will be little advantage to trade and navigation as the danger now will be the Spanish Armada. The Queen of England will have ill neighbours, and what she is going to do with the King in this part of the world we shall be anxious to hear soon, as it is of importance to all countries.

275. The Pope thanks God
                            Rome
                            May 18, 1596
    A Consistory was held last Monday, and amid great rejoicings God was thanked for the conquest of Calais, since for the future a harbour is open for the Roman Church to oppose the heretics in England.

275. Dysentery in Drake’s Fleet. Drake dead
                            Antwerp
                            May 18, 1596
    They write from Middelburg on the the 16th inst. that five ships have arrived from Spain reporting that dysentery has broken out among the crews of Captain Drake, and that Drake himself and his second in command and many of his men have died of it. Upon this the troops left Havana and all the forts and sailed back and ran into the Spanish Armada. They were so completely encircled by it that not more than three ships of their number got back to England.
    Others say, however, that Drake has captured an island near Havana called Santa Martha, has fortified Havana and been joined by many Indians. The English Armada, 100 warships and 50 storeships strong, is said to have sailed for Plymouth and to be awaiting a fair wind there. With the fleet are 14,000 veteran soldiers, and many nobles who have volunteered. Colonel Vere has arrived here from Holland with 2500 well-equipped soldiers, who are also able to sail.

275-276. Guardships in the Channel
                            Antwerp
                            June 1, 1596
                            background: Irish Rebellion over
    The announcement dated 16th comes from London that the fleet has not yet sailed, but is to start in five or six days. The Queen has stationed five of her warships between Calais and Dover, to keep guard there. The Duc de Bouillon has been informed by the Queen that she will continue to afford assistance to his King, and 4000 English soldiers have already arrived at Boulogne, sent there by the Queen.
    The disorder in Ireland is now quite at an end, and the Earl of Tyrone has been reconciled with the Queen and given her his son as a hostage. The King of Scots has publicly commanded his subjects to keep on good terms with the Queen and to afford her help if the King of Spain should make an attack upon her.
    Henri de la tour, Duc de Bouillon, 1555-1623.

276. English Aid for France
                            Antwerp
                            June 8, 1596
    The Duc de Bouillon has returned to France well content. The Queen has promised to send him 10,000 soldiers and to give him a sum of money as well. In return she demands Boulogne in pledge, and when Calais is retaken it is to be ceded to her, whereupon she will give Boulogne back.

276. Delight of Philip over Drake’s Death
                            Rome
                            June 22, 1596
    Letters reached here recently by a Spanish messenger to the effect that the King has had definite news of the death of Drake and that fifteen large English ships which Drake had with him are lost. His Sacred Majesty was extremely delighted at this news and some Spanish ships fell upon the English, who at once fled. But the Spanish General sped after them and took two, finding on board 60 soldiers and 20 nobles.

276-277. The English at Cadiz
                            Madrid
                            July 6, 1596
    The English commander is said to have left Plymouth on the 11th June and to be sailing towards us. When this was heard of at Lisbon the people moved out with women and children in large numbers. They entirely abandoned the Arsenal and the suburbs. But the English did not sail to Portugal but to Cape St. Vincent and Cadiz. There, however, they fell into a calm and could not move. But in the meanwhile the people had armed, and came in multitudes on horse and foot from Seville and Jerez de la Frontera to Cadiz. In spite of this the English sent small boats into the bay of Cadiz, which is the harbour, and of the fleet lying there ready to go to India they burnt two ships and drove ashore another two which tried to escape, although 14 galleys, badly armed it is true, were in the vicinity. It is unknown whether they have done further damagae, as also whether they meant to take Cadiz, or what other plan they may have. So far there are about 130 ships all together, but as Cadiz is strongly held by troops, it is hoped that they will fail to do anything.

277. Consternation in Spain
                            Antwerp
                            July 27, 1596
    On the 24th inst. there arrived at Flushing a pinnace from England with letters from this Queen to Count Maurice. The letters announce that the English fleet has landed at Cadiz in Andalusia, and taken the town and 30 ships laden for India. So there is great consternation in Spain, particularly because the Barbary Moors have joined the English with their galleys. A thousand fresh English soldiers have arrived at Flushing, and more troops are expected from Scotland and France to give the Cardinal plenty to do.

277-278. Capture and Looting of Cadiz
                            Middelburg
                            July 30, 1596
                            background: Arsinoe is a town in Egypt.
    On the 27th inst. I reported what news had come in about the English fleet. Since then another eight vessels, 22 days out from San Lucar, have come in. They bring not only confirmation but also plenty of details of events up to their departure. When the English arrived before Cadiz on the last day of June they found there four big galleons with 1000 to 1200 men on board, together with 20 to 22 galleys. These vessels moved up in crescent formation. The English Vice-Admiral advanced against them and, after an exchange of shots, he anchored to their right. In this position the two fleets fought furiously for a long while, but as the wind was unfavourable for the Spaniards they fell into disorder, and the English burnt the two galleons San Philippo and San Andrea. They also sank several galleys which could not get away. Then the Englishmen rapidly entered the harbour, where they found 36 ships with mixed cargoes for New Spain. On the next day they landed troops and captured the town, but they met with much resistance so that there was great loss on both sides. The Spaniards defended themselves for a long time bravely, but the English were 20,000 strong, including 300 horse. The English subsequently sailed to Santa Maria and there and at San Lucar plundered and burnt. Some nobles in the fort at San Lucar in expectation of relief held the place for five days, but in the end they had to surrender. The fear now is of the English going on to Seville where they could completely devastate the open country. God protect the unhappy country folk, already in such fear and terror as prevail all over Spain. In company with the English were five galleys from Barbary. They relate that the King of Arsinoe has armed also and raised 40-50,000 men. He is said also to have given permission to the English to put into Barbary and obtain provisions and other military stores. The English have already sent some captured ships to Barbary, and the outcome is awaited with great anxiety as heavy losses are feared amongst the traders.

278-279. Sensation in Venice
                            Venice
                            August 4, 1596
    When the English fleet appeared off Cape St. Vincent it turned towards the small town of Gibraltar and there entered the Straits or Narrows. Here it came upon some vessels with spice and other wares. When the Spaniards realised this, they set fire to the ships to prevent the enemy using them and escaped to land themselves. Then the English sailed to Cadiz, where large numbers of armed people confronted them on shore. But after a bombardment with big guns from 200 ships, some of the people turned to flight, others surrendered. Antonio Perez helped the English greatly in their capture and looting of Cadiz. Some say the town surrendered and paid 300,000 crowns. There is all sorts of talk, especially about the merchants who drove up the price of cochineal and other Indian commodities. As I close this letter three messengers from different firms in Florence arrive and report, not only the attack on Cadiz, and the capture of the town by the English fleet, but their snapping up of four millions of gold in four caravels bound to Portugal from India; two were for the King, two for private individuals. According to the Spaniards the English fleet seems to grow stronger every day.

279-280. The Inhabitants of Seville are running away
Amsterdam
August 8, 1596
background: Copy of a document of August 3, 1596, concerning Cadiz.
    Eight vessels from San Lucar arrived in Holland here and also at Middelburg on August 1. They had escaped from arrest and were mostly in ballast with a little oil. They relate how the English Armada arrived there on July 29, and at once entered the bay of Cadiz. There they found 18 galleys, 9 galleons and 40 ships, all ready to sail for India and New Spain, and richly laden with all sorts of valuable goods. On the very next day, July 30, they landed their troops to take Cadiz. They at once made two attacks, during which 3000 English are said to have fallen; however they had the better of it. On the same day they set fire to two of the King of Spain’s ships, the Vice-Admiral’s ship with 600 soldiers, and the galleon Philippo of 1400 tons with 1000 soldiers. On the English side three large ships and many small ones were swamped or sunk by gunfire. On the 1st July they carried the town by storm and murdered all they found with arms in their hands. It is rumoured that 10,000 men were in the town and many were killed but most fled. The English at once destroyed the bridges, and although 500 horse came from Jerez to lend aid, they were driven back by the English musketeers. As the Spaniards saw that the bridge was gone, and they could render no help, they and 6000 soldiers in Jeres took to flight. Two days before the capture of the town the Duke of Medina Sidonia was at Cadiz, and went from there to Porto Santa Maria to restore order and obtain more troops. help is daily expected from Lisbon. The people of San Lucar were terrified also, for they feared the English would soon come to them too. There is said to be such panic throughout Spain that all the people, especially those of Seville, are running away. This looks like a great change, and it will cause great poverty among merchants. May God the Lord dispose all for the best!

280. The English have sailed away, but where to?
                            Antwerp
                            August 12, 1596
    Three ships from the English Armada are said to have arrived this week, and to have reported that the English have sailed away from Cadiz with their booty. The English are only out for loot. This characteristic is innate. Antonio Perez, former Secretary to the King of Spain, who fled from Aragon to England, is said to have left after the capture of Cadiz with 80 sail for an unknown destination.

280. Perhaps they will quarrel over the Spoil
                            Venice
                            August 16, 1596
    Letters from Spain of the 22nd ult. describe the brutalities practised by the English at the capture of Cadiz. They plundered and burnt everything and extorted 200,000 ducats ransom from the inhabitants. They pulled down churches, took pictures, sacred elements and bells from churches and towers, and inflicted every sort of indignity on priests and nuns. They have sailed off with many prisoners who could not pay their ransom, presumably to the island of Terceira, to lie in wait for the Seville fleet. However, it has returned to Seville. The English living here state that gentlemen of very high rank among the English have commanded the convent ladies to accompany them to the island of Corvo, and that this has been done. The fleet is said to have fallen out over the loot, so it might share the fate of Drake.

281. The English Fleet returns home with its Booty
                            Antwerp
                            August 31, 1596
    Letters from Middelburg of the 29th inst. state that London letters of the 24th report that the English fleet with all vessels from Holland and Zeeland has returned to England with great spoils, notably much linen, steel, iron, sugar and many other things found on the Indian ships, and besides this 200 metal guns. The ships are discharging at Portsmouth and Plymouth. With the first fair wind the Earl of Cumberland is to sail with 60 vessels to lie in wait for the Indian fleet.

281. Unrest in Africa
                           Rome
                            September 7, 1596
                            background: Men and Munitions commandeered by Philip
    Spanish letters of the 19th August announce that the Moors in Africa get more and more restless as time goes on, that 20,000 of them have again banded together and are doing great damage by robbery and murder near Ceuta. As the English after their invasion of Cadiz caused great unrest among the countries bordering on Spain, the whole of Spain is roused, and both kingdoms of the ancient realm of Castile long to defend themselves against the English. They have promised their King 30 millions at fixed intervals over twenty years, 1 1/2 millions to be paid yearly. The English fleet is said to be off Cape St. Vincent, but is sailing to the Azores to wait for the Indian fleet. The Spanish letters state in conclusion that the King has ordered all the princes and gentlemen of his country to deliver to him at a reasonable price all big guns which they have for defence in their castles.

282. Turkey will not last much longer
                            Rome
                            September 14, 1596.
    In addition to the 30 millions granted to the King of Spain, as recently notified, many towns have subsequently offered to raise and maintain a strong body of troops at their own expense for the duration of the war.
    A flysheet will shortly be printed here announcing that the Ottoman Empire and Mahomed III, the ruling Turkish Emperor, will soon come to an end, and that Constantinople will fall into the hands of the Christians. This is to happen in 1597 or a little later in accordance with the forecasts of all Prophets and of Holy Writ, as well as of the Turks.

282. Malays in Ceylon
                            Rome,
                            eptember 28, 1596.
    Vessels lately arrived in Spain have brought 2 millions of gold and the report that the capital of an island called Ceylon in the East Indies is being besieged by 50,000 Malays. So 4000 Portuguese have sailed as a defence force, to relieve the town and end the siege.

282. Embargo on Navigation to Spain
                            Cologne
                            October 17, 1596.
    Letters from Amsterdam of the 12th inst. state that the States General have combined with England and France to forbid navigation to Spain. Those who had intended to sail thither have been ordered to unload their ships, and those bound to England and France must give surety that they are travelling nowhere else. At the moment all the legislatures of the United Provinces are assembled at the Hague to arrange an increase in convoy fees for the maintenance of troops. This embargo on navigation will be a serious loss to many, and the ordinary man will find it hard to earn a livelihood with provisions so dear.

283. Gold and Silver reaches San Lucar
                            Venice
                            October 25, 1596.
    We hear from England that this Queen presented on their departure to the Duc de Bouillon a silver loving cup worth 10,000 crowns, and to Monsieur de Chartres, Governor of Dieppe, a jewel worth 5000.
    By special letters from Spain we hear that the fleet reached San Lucar with the gold and silver on September 27. It is said to have left Havana on the 3rd ult. and never to have crossed so quickly before.
italics:See Fugger News-Letter (First Series), Letter 175, Conferment of the Garter on Henry IV.

283. English Alliance with France
                            Lyons
                            November 7, 1596.
    The English envoy has started back home from Rouen after confirming the alliance afresh. The King has presented him with many fine horses and a green cloak ornamented with diamonds and worth by itself 20,000 crowns. The arrangement with the Duc de Mercœur in Brittany is at an end, so that all the princes of that country are now united with His Majesty.

283. Spanish Fleet against England
                            Rome
                            November 9, 1596.
    Spanish letters on the 15th October announce that 15,000 Castilian and Portuguese soldiers embarked in Lisbon harbour on the 9th inst. in 122 large ships and galleys with a large store of provisions and ammunition to sail for Ireland. The brother of the Earl of Tyrone from Ireland is said to be accompanying this Armada. It is all directed against the Queen of England.

283-284. Its Captures
                            Venice
                            November 22, 1596.
    The only news from France is that the King there is still pressing the Queen of England for 4 millions in gold to carry on the war with Spain. But it will be granted him only if he pledges Boulogne.
    Spanish letters announce that the Spanish Armada has captured on the voyage to England 7 English vessels, 4 from Syria with spices and 3 with sugar. They have chained the crews to the galleys.
    It appears that the English envoy followed the Sultan to his camp in Hungary and is working hard for peace between His Imperial Majesty and the Grand Turk. But the conditions are too severe for the Emperor.

284. The Turks in Hungary
unknown
4 November
background: Statement of the Bey captured by His Sacred Majesty before Keresztes and examined at Kaschau on November 4.
    He says he was Bay at Weissenburg for seven years and Aga of 3000 janissaries at Fünfkirchen for two. He is now taking part in this campaign. He says that with his master, Osman pasha, he waited on the Grand Turk who was quartered a few miles from Erlau on September 18. There he was asked by the Turkish Emperor what Colonels and commanders the Roman Emperor had in Hungary. He told him this, and then the Sultan had a long conversation about peace negotiations with the English envoy and Viziers. The Grand Turk was strongly urged towards peace by the English envoy but dissuaded by the Beglerbey of Greece and the son of Sinan Pasha.

284-285. The States General at Meaux
                            Venice
                            November 30, 1596.
    Letters of the 15th from Lyons announce that the King and the entire Court have left Rouen for Meaux for the meeting of the Estates there. The Ducs de Montpensier, Mayenne, Nemours, and Guise and the Constable de Montmorency and other great gentlemen of the Kingdom have proceeded there also. In addition to these the envoys of England, Scotland, Denmark and the States General were expected to negotiate the fresh alliance against the King of Spain.
italics: Henry of Savoy, Duke of Nemours, 1572-1632, at first an adherent of the Holy League, then reconciled with Henry IV. Finally he fought against Savoy without success. But his chief occupation was the composition of ballets which he caused to be performed at his country house.

285. Brescian and Milanese Munitions for Spain again
                            Venice
                            December 6, 1596.
    A distinguished nobleman of Seville, who came there from Milan, is in the city. He narrates that between Brescia and Milan he ordered 12,000 hackbuts and 4000 pikes to take with him to Seville. Sixty guns are also being cast there, and the whole consignment must be ready next March. Munitions in Spain are very dear, and the King has recently been offered 7 millions in gold to lead his great army against the Queen of England and the rebels in the Netherlands.

285. King Philip defaults
                            Rome
                            December 7, 1596.
    Last Tuesday night four messengers from Genoa sent by the merchants there rode through here on their way to Naples. The same number are riding to the Netherlands and two to Milan. All this because the King of Spain is withholding payment of the money brought by the fleet, and requiring its use as a loan for the war against England and the Netherlands. The King will repay the money with interest in three years, or take it as an advance on the 30 millions promised him by the Kingdom of Castile for the English war. Genoa reports that there is consternation among merchants. Everything is in confusion and there will be many failures.

285-286. Food Scarcity in London
                            Antwerp
                            December 7, 1596.
    The Commissioners of the States General have returned from England. Apparently they would have liked to redeem Flushing and Briel. They were ready to repay Her Majesty the money she had advanced, but the Queen would not consent, and we hear from Amsterdam that envoys are to be sent to the Queen again this week.
    London reports of the 30th inst. state that some corn-ships have reached there safely from Amsterdam, but that the scarcity remains severe. Military preparations have slackened as there is no longer fear of the Spanish Armada.

286. Spanish Fleet for Ireland damaged in a Storm
                            Lyons
                            December 9, 1596.
    We hear nothing except that the Spanish Armada which was going to Ireland has suffered great damage in a storm. Twenty-eight ships and 4000 men are supposed to have been lost. The remainder has put back to Galicia and Biscay, and so many troops will again be raised in Spain.

286. English Cloth in the Low Countries
                            Antwerp
                            December 14, 1596.
    Some ships have arrived at Middelburg with English cloth and have already begun to sell it.
    They write from Zeeland that a Scotch Captain has been brought in prisoner to the Hague. Letters have been found in his possession which prove him guilty of having arranged with the Cardinal of Austria about the town of Veere, that His Highness should send 6000 Spaniards into the country. The whole thing was discovered through a Captain in the same town, who had received money from the Scotch Captain. He will receive the reward he deserves.

286-287. English Troops for Ireland, France, the Low Countries
                            Brussels
                            January 6, 1597.
    Letters from England report that this Queen has been in bed for some days, indisposed and seriously ill. She is closely guarded also, and only discusses business with her most intimate Ministers. In all directions she is raising troops and drilling, since she wishes to send them partly to Ireland, partly to France, Holland and Zeeland. A special vessel is being got ready in London to take an envoy to Denmark. The King of Spain wanted to send the Count de Barlaimont there, and the Queen wishes to prevent his despatch.
    All places in Zeeland and on the Baltic have been written to that the Spanish Armada has been damaged, and that no trade of any sort may be carried on with Spain on risk of ship and cargo being confiscated.
    All sorts of preparations for war are being hastily made in England, and merchant ships are even being used as warships so that the son of Don Antonio may take them to Spain as soon as possible.
    It is reported from Ireland that a general levy of the people is being made, and this causes great excitement. Although the Spanish General has suffered loss and only gets very slender assistance from foreign troops, the wild Irish join him in great numbers daily. In this way he does the English considerable harm. Moreover he is very overbearing and cruel to prisoners.

287-288. A Wet Winter Wheat brought to England from Holland
                            Antwerp
                            January 5, 1597.
    From London comes news that the rain lasts day and night and the country is waterlogged. The roads are in such a state that it is impossible to travel by carriage or on horseback. However, the English are not much afraid of the Spanish Armada, as preparations have been made by sea and land. Raleigh the corsair is to go to India with some ships and some other commander to the rich land of Guiana. Certain noblemen also are to sail.
    This week two Englishmen failed, William Bicker and George Lester. They owe a good deal of money, and ask, without offering sureties, for two month’s grace.
    The fleet is said to have reached Harwich from Staden with a quantity of merchandise and 1200 loads of wheat.
footnote: Sir Walter Raleigh, 1552-1618. He played an important part at the Court of Elizabeth while quite a youth. During the Massacre of St. Bartholomew he was apparently living in Paris, since he fought in France on the Huguenot side from 1569 till 1576. In 1578 he made a voyage of discovery to North America, from 1580 to 1582 he took part in the suppression of the Irish rebellion, in 1584 he received from the Queen a Letter Patent authorizing the discovery and conquest of unknown lands, and went on fresh voyages of discovery to North America, where he found the colony called in honour of the Queen Virginia. In 1588 he joined with his own ship in the fight against the Armada and was afterwards repeatedly entrusted with important naval commands. In 1600 he became Governor of Jersey. On the accession of James I he was condemned to death for alleged conspiracy against the King, but was respited. However, from 1603 to 1616 he and his wife were imprisoned in the Tower. In 1616, by commission of the King, he conducted an expedition to Guiana, but on his return he was arrested on Spanish instigation and the sentence of death was carried out.

288. The Debts of Philip II
                            Rome
                            January 11, 1597.
    Letters of the 11th ult. from Spain report that an Irish envoy has arrived in Madrid and has been very well received by the King. He will presumably try to obtain help. The King has sent 1 1/2 millions to Italy by the galleys in which the two Cardinals were.
    The King has published by a new Edict that he means to pay his debts to the merchants, but that he desires an audit of their accounts and trade records since the year 1577. The money has been commandeered only because it has often reached his enemies and because of the great dishonesty of the Genoese. A list of His Majesty’s debts to gentlemen concerned is being distributed here, as follows:
                                   Crowns.
    Messrs. Francesco and Pietro Malvenda   .     800,000
    Ambrosio Spinola    .  .  .  .     400,000
    Vittorio Suarez .  .  .  .     170,000
    Nicolo Formano  .  .  .  .     600,000
    Nicolo Doria    .  .  .  .  .     100,000
    Spinola & Nigroni   .  .  .  .     900,000
    Fiesco & Giustiniani    .  .  .  .     800,000
    Sauli   .  .  .  .  .  .     350,000
    Messrs. Fugger  .  .  .  .     700,000
    Other private individuals in Flanders   .  .  1,300,000

289.  London Bankruptcies, Deaths and Births
              Antwerp
              January 17, 1597.
  The only news from London dated 8th inst. is that the late heirs of John Baptist Cagoria have failed.  John Baptist Giustiniani has fled the country.  He is said to owe £3000.  There were in London last year 3496 deaths, 1300 of them from plague.  On the other hand, 4841 children were born.

289.  The English Doctor of the Prince of Juliers
              Cologne
              January 23, 1597.
  The English Doctor who is to attend the Prince of Juliers is here.  The Councillors demand that he should first give proofs of his skill on others.  They also wish to address a question to His Imperial Majesty, so as to get His Majesty’s opinion.
  italics: John William, last Duke of Juliers, Cleves and Berg, 1562-1609.  During most of his life he was mad.  He was married to Jacobea, Margravine of Baden, and caused her to be assassinated for alleged adultery in 1597.  Sybilla, 1557-1628, was married for the first time to Philip, Margrave of Baden, for the second time to Charles of Austria, Margrave of Burgau.  After the death of John William a furious quarrel broke out over the Juliers succession.

289.  Flour Prices up fourfold at London
              Antwerp
              February 15, 1597.
  London letters of the 9th inst. report that the ships Charité and Mignon after a nine weeks’ voyage have arrived from the East with a large quantity of spices, drugs and silk stuffs.  Also a ship called the St. Cherubin and some others from Malaga have come in with wine and dried fish.  The scarcity still continues.  Flour, formerly costing 2 1/2 Rhinegulden, now comes to 10.

289-290.  The Queen’s Gifts to the Sultan
              Venice
              February 28, 1597.
  They write from Constantinople that the Queen of England has presented the Grand Turk with two pairs of beautiful gold clocks.  One looks like a galley and strikes every hour, the other shows the movements of all the planets in the heavens.

290.  House Tax in England
              Antwerp
              March 1, 1597.
  They write from Middelburg on the 27th February that two Hamburg ships have been confiscated in England for having munitions on board.  The Queen of England keeps work at her fleet going on hard.  Her agent has been here to ask for the help of 40 to 50 vessels.  Also all houses in England have been scheduled and a tax imposed.  The City of London alone contributes £30,000.  It is not yet known what for, though it is guessed that they are going to sail to Corunna and there destroy and burn the ships, which are in great confusion.  So the Spaniards will have enough to do in all directions.

290.  The Queen tries to draw England, Ireland and Scotland together
              Antwerp
              March 15, 1597.
  They write from London that the Queen is determined to send Lord Essex to Spain next spring with the fleet at which they are working so hard.  She has sent Lord Borough to Ireland with full powers to come to terms with the leaders of the rebellion about all matters in dispute.  The King of Scots has not only promised to pardon the three Earls exiled for religion and rebellion, but has urgently commanded his Ministers to be reconciled with the Church.  Some Ministers, however, and the common people object to this, so the unrest is still fairly great.  This King wanted to quarter 400 horse in Edinburgh, but the inhabitants refused.  They promised His Majesty £1000 to make up.

290-291.  The Queen’s Designs in North Africa
              Rome
              March 22, 1597.
  Spanish letters report that great preparations are being made with fighting men on sea and land and that the Queen of England is also wasting no time.  She intends to throw her entire force into Mauretania for the benefit of the King of Morocco and Fez.  In this way she will bring pressure to bear upon Spain, as with the help of these Moors she will invade Spain and capture certain towns.

291.  £300,000 in Taxes
              Antwerp
              April 26, 1597.
  London letters of the 2nd inst. say that they are still hard at work on the fleet so that it may sail about the middle of May.  The destination is still unknown.  It is also reported that at the Queen’s Arsenal of Dublin in Ireland a fire broke out which burnt all ammunition and did great damage.  The Queen has collected over £300,000 in taxes from her subjects all over the country in order, as is said, to help the King of France.

291.  The Prince of Juliers and the English Doctor
              Cologne
              May 1, 1597.
  The Prince of Juliers has submitted to the care of the English Doctor.  If he cures him he will gain great honour.

291.  Detention of Merchant Ships for War Purposes
              Antwerp
              May 10, 1597.
  From London of May 3 we learn that all ships are being detained there, and that the same thing is happening in all the ports of the country.  They also write from there, and this is confirmed by the vessels from San Lucar and Lisbon arriving at Middelburg, that 200 Spanish sail are at sea.  Vessels reaching Middelburg confirm that 6 English ships have taken the island of San Martin and built a fort there.  They also aver that the King of Spain is detaining 120 Netherlands ships.

291-292.  Spanish Traitors
              Rome
              May 10, 1597.
  We hear from Spain that Hieronimo Lomenino, an important man of business at Granada, has been beheaded, and his property amounting to 40,000 crowns confiscated by the government.  He has been sending money secretly to Genoa in bales of wool in order to get it to the King of France.  The money was found in the bales.  The Corregidor of Malaga has been stabbed by a Captain who accused him of being a traitor to his King.  At the Corregidor’s were found some letters from the Queen of England.  So there is treason enough on all hands.

292.  The English Fleet to be ready for Sea
              Brussels
              May 14, 1597.
  Letters of the 5th inst. from London say that the Queen has earnestly enjoined upon her commanders that they should go on board with their crews, so that they may be available at once, and be able to sail out in good order to the destination named.  In the meanwhile the Queen has sent vessels to Biscay, Portugal and Galicia, to find out what the Spanish Armada means to do.
  They write from Holland that the States General have sent some of their warships to join the English fleet.  The Queen has urged them not to take the field, but simply to hold their frontiers and send their remaining troops to the King of France.
  The Queen has also not yet settled the disputes about the Licences.  Only her greed is at fault, and if she does not soon find a remedy it may be her ruin.
  They also declare that the King of Denmark has entered into an alliance with England, France and Holland.

292-293.  Forty Ships have already sailed
              Antwerp
              May 27, 1597.
              background: London Bankruptcies
  From Middelburg on the 22nd comes the report that the English have already despatched 40 ships to the island of San Martino and have occupied an island near Cartagena.  So some of the Spanish Armada vessels have put out to anticipate the English.
  Giuliano Roniter and his Company have failed in London.  Many merchants in London and also in the Netherlands are interested in this.

293.  London Bankruptcies.  Fall in Price of Corn
              Antwerp
              June 7, 1597.
  Letters from London of the last day of May report that 50 corn-ships have come in there from various places.  So corn which was previously costing 100 Rhinegulden has fallen by 16 to 18 gulden in a week.  But business is quite ruined by the scarcity.
  In three or four weeks a big fleet is to sail.
  Antonio Bay, Christopher Bonart and several others also have failed in London.  Roniter and Leville owe £26,000.  They are ready to repay with interest and without surety in four years.

293.  The Prince of Juliers incurable
              Cologne
              June 12, 1597.
  According to all appearances the English Doctor will not manage to restore the Duke of Juliers to his senses.  So he will lost greatly in credit and reputation.  If he had been able to help His Serene Highness it would have been a useful thing, as he would thus have been able to keep together the Duchies of Juliers, Cleves and Berg with all their dependencies.

293.  More Financial Distress in London
              Antwerp
              July 21, 1597.
  Of the recently mentioned English bankrupts Jaques Joan has actually fled.  Many sound people have interests in this firm.  His master, who came over from London and from whom he had embezzled a large sum of money, was so upset about it that he killed himself in his own warehouse, although despite the loss he is still reckoned worth £20,000 and was a man of 60.

294.  English Troops for France
              Brussels
              June 28, 1597.
  Letters from England of the 18th inst. announce that the newly raised troops are already assembled and have been armed at the Arsenal in London.  They are to be taken at once to Boulogne in France.  It is thought certain in England that, with the help of these men and of other foreign contingents, the King of Navarre will set about the recapture of Calais this very summer.  For the English troops a large number of shovels, pickaxes and other implements of the sort, together with military engines, have been shipped.  These are to be carried over to France simultaneously with 500 miners taken from the tin and lead mines in Cornwall.
  The Queen is now at Greenwich at the French envoy’s.  But it is said that she may be leaving for Canterbury any day.

294.  An immense English Fleet to sail with the first fair wind
              Antwerp
              July 5, 1597.
  From London dated June 28th we hear that the fleet is ready and that all Captains and soldiers have come to Dover to sail with the first fair wind.  But nobody knows the destination except General the Earl of Essex and four other persons.  It is also stated that never has such an Armada put to sea since the English have waged war.  They have over 600 brass guns on board and can if necessary discharge 200 shots at each broadside.

294-295.  Junction of the Dutch and English Fleets with those of Jersey, La Rochelle and
  Bordeaux
              Brussels
              July 12, 1597.
  They write from Holland that their ships have already joined the English Armada.  Don Antonio’s son is said to be on board as well as 18,000 men, not counting the nobles who go at their own expense.  Admiral Howard is to block the Spaniards’ passage to England.  At the island of Jersey are nine more fully equipped vessels which are to join this Armada.  They have been fitted out by the merchants of La Rochelle, Bordeaux and other places at their own expense.  From the Tower of London have been brought a quantity of arms of all sorts, and munitions and 30 big guns, kept hitherto for cases of dire necessity.  The Queen is to make her Court at Dover, so as to be nearer to France in case of eventualities.  Some emissaries from France also are to wait upon the Queen to furnish security for war expenditure on behalf of France.  The Queen has summoned Colonel Norris from Ireland.  He has reduced it to order.  She has sent the King of France 10,000 soldiers to reinforce him and will pay them herself till the end of October.  Norris she has made a General.

295.  The Fleet has sailed in two divisions
              Antwerp
              July 19, 1597.
  From England through Zeeland we have reliable tidings that the English Armada with the warships from Holland and Zeeland, 120 sail strong with 12,000 to 15,000 soldiers without counting the sailors, has sailed in two groups, one on the 8th the other on the 10th.  The wind is fairly good.  Where they will go, the Lord God alone knows.  Those whom they attack are greatly to be commiserated and pitied.  It is said that this Armada has only taken provisions for four months, so it is thought that no long journey is to be made.

295-296.  It has been sighted at Sea
              Brussels
              July 26, 1597.
  A vessel arrived in Holland from Portugal reports that it met the English Armada at sea.  They say the fleet is going straight to Africa and Barbary to stir up the Moors, of whom 200,000 from all provinces are assembled.  Then they will at once descend upon Spain.  The English have laden vessels with all sorts of weapons so as to equip the unarmed Moors.  Of the Spanish Armada we only hear that the Count of Fuentes, the General, has moved out to offer resistance where required.  Antonio Perez seems to have been despatched by the Queen of England long ago to the King of Fez to negotiate about the rising of the Moors.  He is with the Armada himself.

296.  Some say it has been scattered by a Gale
              Antwerp
              August 16, 1597.
  A vessel from Galicia has arrived at Middelburg.  Those on board say that they met 54 to 60 ships of the English Armada off the Galician coast.  The English took off their pilot and ordered them to say they were sailing towards the Spanish fleet.  Others again assert the contrary, that the English fleet has been completely scattered by gales, so that only a small portion of it has returned to England.  But we shall soon hear something more accurate, as the wind from Spain is fair.

296.  The King of Morocco apologizes to Spain
              Venice
              September 19, 1597.
  It is announced from Spain under date August 12 that the King of Morocco has sent four of his chief Moors to the King of Spain to apologize for having an agreement with the Queen of England.  It looks as though he were rather less than contented with the Queen.

296-297.  The English Fleet off Lisbon
              Antwerp
              September 27, 1597.
  By letters from Lisbon we learn that five ships very richly laden have arrived from India.  They say they saw many vessels off the Canaries, but could not be certain whether it was the English fleet.  But letters from Lisbon report that this fleet has sailed by quite close to Lisbon on the look-out for the Indian ships.
  They write from London on the 20th inst. that the envoys from Denmark have been cordially received and granted an audience.  Their objects are, firstly, the renewal of the friendship between the two kingdoms; secondly, the return of property looted at sea; thirdly, free navigation to Spain.  As a fourth point they offer that their King shall act as intermediary between England and Spain.

297.  The Jesuits assign England and Scotland to the King of Spain
              Rome
              October 4, 1597.
  As the Pope is again ill in bed all business is at a standstill.  Even though His Holiness trusts Cardinal Aldobrandini, the latter is unfamiliar with the affairs of the States of the Church, and there are only a few people who do know anything about the matter.  Accordingly the Spanish ambassador has complained to the Pope about His Holiness having accepted a document delivered to Him.  This document states that the King of Scots is to succeed the Queen of England on her death; but the Pope is adjured to use every effort to restore these two Huguenot kingdoms to the Papal religion.  Against this document the Jesuits have composed one assigning the succession in the above-mentioned kingdoms to the King of Spain and his heirs.
  background: Cardinal Aldobrandini was made a Cardinal at 22 years of age, and during the reign of his uncle Pope Clement VIII managed the political affairs of the States of the Church.  He was born in 1572 and died as Archbishop of Ravenna in 1621.

297.  The English Fleet off Corunna 
              Antwerp
              October 28, 1597.
  It is reported from Amsterdam that the English are having to leave Holland because, at the desire of the English and for little reason, trade with Moscow has been forbidden to the Netherlanders and only the English are admitted.
  From England we learn that all they know of their fleet is that it is lying near Corunna waiting for the Spaniards to come out.
  Great honour has been shown to the Danish envoy, but what he has accomplished is unknown.

298.  Alliance between England and Denmark
              Antwerp
              October 31, 1597.
  They write from Amsterdam that the Danish envoy has gone home.  He confirms the alliance concluded between Denmark and England.  The Queen told him she did not wish to change the Danish alliance, but she could make no peace with the King of Spain, because he had designs on her freedom, her life and her country.  She has removed the embargo on navigation to Spain.

298.  Marriage of Emanuel of Portugal with Emily of Nassau
              Brussels
              December 27 1597.
  The marriage of the sister of Count Maurice of Nassau to the son of Don Antonio of Portugal, who calls himself a Prince from Portugal, had been celebrated.  The ceremony was performed at the house of Admiral Egmond at the Hague in presence of that Admiral and of many other Huguenot gentlemen.  Count Maurice was not present, and bride and bridegroom have fled to Wesel as he is in pursuit of them.

298-299.  France disposed for Peace
              Antwerp
              January 30, 1598.
  The General of the Franciscans has come back to Brussels with the announcement that the Council of State in France has decided to meet for peace negotiations.  So the Cardinal has sent President Richardot, and the King of France Monsieur de Villeroy with his First Secretary from Paris to St. Quentin to inquire whether peace is attainable.  If it looks promising the Duc d’Aerschote and the Marquis de Havré are also to be sent to France.  Many hope for peace.  Others say on the contrary that the King of France has asked the Queen of England and the States of Holland and Zeeland for a large sum of money and many troops, with the statement that he will not abandon them if they grant his desire.  Therefore the Hollanders are holding a meeting at Dieppe, and it seems as though they would not be in agreement with the King, if he were to make a separate peace with this country.
  It is reported from London that the scarcity there still continues, and that the Earl of Cumberland is ready to sail with his ships.  A fresh Armada is being prepared for the spring, and the Queen has nominated the Earl of Essex Marshal General of her dominions and commanded him to carry on the government in place of herself.
  background: Nicole de Neufville, Seigneur de Villeroi, 1542-1617, French Secretary of State, supported the League under the last of the Valois, but later took up the cause of Henry IV.  He, together with the French Cardinals, succeeded in bringing about the reconciliation with the Pope.  To the day of his death he had great influence with Henry IV and his second wife Marie de Médicis.

299.  English Envoy to the Diet of Ratisbon
              Cologne
              February 7, 1598.
  An English envoy reached Deutz opposite Cologne lately with 50 horses.  He was accompanied by Hollander servants, and has gone on to Frankfurt to attend the Imperial Diet at Ratisbon.

299.  Overtures for Peace between Turkey and the Empire
              Gran
              February 1, 1598.
  The present Vizier Pasha seems to set far more store by the favour of the Emperor than Ibrahim Pasha, and would like peace to be concluded.  But the Sultan will not write the first letter, and is said to have requested the English envoy in consequence to begin the negotiations, and to write to the Woiwode Michael and advise him to send the tribute.  It is thought that this would be the beginning of a peace to be concluded between His Majesty and the Turkish Emperor.  This is why the English envoy has been sent to the Prince of Wallachia, to give him every information and to ask him to impart what he has learnt to the Emperor through one of his envoys.

300.  Threatened Expulsion of German Merchants from London
              Antwerp
              February 2, 1598
  They write from London on the 24th ult. that this Queen has published an order there that all Baltic and German merchants are to leave the country and take their property with them.  This is because the English has been expelled from the Empire.  At the same time the Queen has sent an envoy to His Imperial Majesty to arrange the matter on friendly terms.  The English and Dutch peace deputations are likewise quite ready to start for France.  They are only waiting for a favourable wind.  The King of Navarre is said to be demanding from the Spaniards the return of his kingdom of Navarre, with all captured frontier towns and payment of all costs and damages.  The English and Dutch insist on the other hand on being allowed to sail to Spain and the Indies and to carry on their business without hindrance, like the Portuguese, and on the removal from their Provinces of all foreigners, especially Spanish and Italians.  It will probably be hard for the Spaniards to grant this.
 background: The departure of the Germans from the Stalhof in London on Aug. 4, 1598, marks the end of Hanseatic power in England.  See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 187, Expulsion of Hanseatic Merchants.

300.  The Prince of Juliers still not cured, Doctor useless
              Cologne
              February 12, 1598.
  The Prince of Juliers is still at Hambach, and the English Doctor has accomplished little so far with his drugs.  The Estates think of holding a session at Essen to consider whether they shall make His Serene Highness marry again.
  Letters from Dordrecht report that at Scheveningen, near the Hague in Holland, a whale has been caught, 20 ft. long and 16 broad.  This the Hollanders consider a good omen.

301.  He is much better, so the English Doctor is some good after all
              Cologne
              February 12, 1598.
  The Duke of Juliers is getting on so much better as regards his mind that it is thought the Councillors of His Serene Highness will soon permit him the use of sidearms again.  It looks, therefore, as though the English Doctor who is still always with His Serene Highness would accomplish something useful.

301.  The Indian Fleet still at the Azores
              Antwerp
              February 28, 1598.
  The Indian Fleet which has been lying at the Azores has not yet reached Seville, and as it is believed that it will start for Seville this March, the Earl of Cumberland has prepared to put out with 36 ships and lie in wait for the fleet.  They hope at Middelburg that the question of the expulsion will be amicably solved between the English and the Empire.  The vessels for India are ready to go, and 10 are to sail from Middelburg, each one taking 120 sailors and nearly 100,000 Rhinegulden.  If they have good luck this trip they will bring back a large store of spices and other things.

301.  Death of the English Envoy to Constantinople
              Venice
              March 8, 1598.
  Constantinople reports that the English envoy to this Court died on the 28th January.  All the Pashas and the Sultan himself regret his loss, for he was such a likeable man that he was always expected to be in attendance on the Sultan.

301-302.  The Dutch and the English do not believe Peace possible
              Antwerp
              March 14, 1598.
  We learn from Middelburg that the States General and the English think the peace merely built upon sand, especially since the Spanish soldiers have come into Calais.  So both sides are arming and we shall have no peace to welcome this summer.  The Baltic traders have been allowed to prolong their stay in London by one month.  It appears also that emissaries have been sent to the English about their return to Staden.  They have let it be understood that they do not propose to go there again unless His Imperial Majesty allows them again complete freedom, and other German Princes and gentlemen furnish security to the same effect.  They mean to make sure that they can never again be ejected and exiled at a moment’s notice, as in the present case.  But this the Princes and gentlemen will not readily do, so trade with the English will probably remain at Middelburg for some time yet.

302.  Funeral of the English Envoy
              Venice
              March 20, 1598.
  They write from Constantinople on the 11th February that the funeral of the late English envoy was carried out with great solemnity and attended by many distinguished gentlemen and representatives of foreign countries.  His Agent is accepted to act in his place pending further instructions from the Queen.

302.  Possible War between England and Scotland
              Venice
              March 27, 1598.
  There is quite a circumstantial rumour here that the King of Scots, with the help and assistance of his brother-in-law, the King of Denmark, has determined to make war on the Queen of England if she nominates the Earl of Essex as her successor on the ground that to him, the King of Scots, belongs the succession to this kingdom before all others.  If this is the case, the Queen will probably leave Spain unattacked.
  background: The King of Denmark at this time was Christian IV, 1577-1648.

303.  Danzig Ships for the Polish-Swedish War
              Antwerp
              May 5, 1598.
  We hear from Amsterdam that some ships have arrived from Danzig and report that all ships at Danzig are being detained.  It seems that they are to be used for the war of the King of Poland against Sweden.  They also report that four English cloth-ships have arrived in the Sound but have been confiscated for not showing their goods to the Customs.  This will cause many failures among the English.

303.  Report of Peace between France, Savoy and Spain
              Middelburg
              May 14, 1598.
  This time we have nothing particularly fresh to write.
  We hear from Antwerp that peace has been concluded between France, Savoy and Spain.  The text of the treaty has been sent to Spain and to the Pope for ratification.  But about our country and England we cannot yet know.  The whole story has been thought untrue in default of any report from France.  We hear from Moscow that the Prince is dead and the English there have had to leave the country.  They seem to be attacked just now on all sides.

303.  Satisfaction in Venice
              Venice
              May 15, 1598.
  A messenger from Ferrara reached the government here to-night with the news of conclusion of peace between the two crowns of Spain and France.  The conditions are at present unknown.  In consequence of this there have been great rejoicings among many supporters of the Roman Church here, as it is hoped that Turkey may now be more readily reduced and that the King of Spain will be able to send a great Armada to Africa, Greece and Cyprus.

303-304.  Another Conspiracy against the Queen
              Cologne
              May 21, 1598.
  At Middelburg when closing their letter they heard of a conspiracy in England and of a nobleman who, at the instigation of the Jesuits, was intending to kill the Queen, but, as we have letters from London dated the 9th and making no mention of this and I hear nothing further about it from Middelburg, I cannot believe it.  The letters from London of the 9th mention only that the deputation from Holland and Zeeland which had been sent there has returned home well pleased, but of peace nothing is said.

304.  The Dutch look forward to more war yet
              Middelburg
              May 21, 1598.
  The bad weather has again done much damage in several parts of this country.  After receiving information that 3000 to 4000 Spanish soldiers have again come out, the English have sent warships to Ireland and Brittany.  Our warships are destined for Calais and Dunkirk.  Our envoys, previously in France, have been in England and returned from there this evening.  Of the peace with France I do not approve, and if it is the fact we shall have to stand the racket alone.  They seem to be arming again in England and in Spain likewise, so that things may well happen at sea.  We have news here too that the English and especially the Earl of Cumberland with 30 ships are off or near Lisbon, and have taken four very richly laden Spanish vessels bound for India.  So the other ships with cargoes for India, both in San Lucar and in Lisbon, will have to unload again.

304-305.  Confiscation of Dutch Property in Spain
              London
              May 23, 1598.
  The news we have to report is that a vessel, which took 11 days to come here from the Canaries, informs us that all ships are being detained throughout Spain, and that Hollander and Zeelander goods are being confiscated.  It is feared that our will fare the same, for the Earl of Cumberland with 27 ships is off Lisbon.
  As the Irish have risen again, warships have been sent from here to crush the rebellion before the Spanish can set foot in the country.
  Our deputies have returned here from France, have had audience with Her Majesty and have journeyed back to France again.  They inform us that peace between France and Spain is concluded, but before it is arranged with England much time will elapse.  The deputies from Holland and Zeeland had also arrived at Dover.  The Queen summoned them before Her and gave them and their suites a splendid reception.  From this it is inferred that Her Majesty will not agree to peace without the consent of the Hollanders and Zeelanders, unless it were a general peace.  But something important must be going on, as these delegates have been sent back so quickly to France with Earl Buckhurst.  It seems that the Spaniards are not behaving honourably, for a nobleman was arrested a few days ago and accused of designs on the life of the Queen.  Others again say this happened for a different reason, so that one can be certain of nothing.

305-306.  Peace between Spain and France not to include England or Holland
              Middelburg
              June 4, 1598.
  It was announced a week ago that the French had arranged a separate peace with the Spaniards, and that England is excluded.  The Frenchman is to get back all his towns, move in and out.  And so our countries will have to carry on the old war with the Cardinal again.  It will last a long while, for so long as this King of Spain lives no peace can be expected on our side; we must go on with the war.  As the Frenchman is going to sit there neutral and do nothing for our country the English will have to be careful.  After lying outside Lisbon for some weeks and stopping ships from sailing, the Earl of Cumberland has gone off to Brazil.  Yesterday and to-day many ships have come out from San Lucar, Lisbon and Portugal and made for Holland.  Two vessels also have arrived from India with hides, woods, gold and pearls.  Vessels are likewise daily expected from Spain.  The people of La Rochelle have carried off two ships from Spain.  The English do not yet know where to go to with their ships.  Their representatives arrived from England yesterday and have been magnificently welcomed and entertained at the Town Hall.  They are now to go to Delft to have a look at the place.  If they can find a port that will do for their ships they will choose it, but at present it is not known what place they will take.

306.  Calais returned to the French.  The Queen fights on
              Middelburg
              July 2, 1598.
  Our only news is that the town of Calais has been handed over to the French.  The Spaniards are moving out and taking with them everything that they can lead or carry, so that the Frenchman gets an empty town.  Now peace may be considered certain.
  The rest of to-day’s news is not good, for the English warships met at sea four Hollander and Zeelander merchantmen out of Biscay bound for Holland, and as they would not surrender but defended themselves against the warships, the English sank one by gunfire and took the other three away to England.  They carry a lot of cash, and this is certain neither to reach its right destination nor to be replaced.  If one could at least get back the wool out of the ships one might bear the loss with equanimity.
  The Queen of England has sent an envoy to the States General which are already assembled at the Hague.  He brings the message that the Queen desires to continue the war against Spain and its adherents and to bring all possible pressure to bear.  She requests that the frontiers of Brabant, Flanders, Artois and Hainault be closed.  If this be not done, the Queen will have to make peace with Spain.
  The English clothiers are taking a long time to think things over, and if they do not come within four or five weeks they will regret it.  The clothsellers are already very tiresome, and trade with the English is all the more awkward as they have no bills of exchange.  There is little other business, so that the ordinary man is the loser.

307.  English Cloth for the Continent
              London
              July 5, 1598.
  As for the peace between us and Spain it is universally talked of even at Court.  All depends upon what Her Majesty’s representatives bring back from France, and their return is awaited with great eagerness.  If they bring good news, then various great Lords and Earls of the Council will be sent to France to continue negotiations with that country.
  Two vessels have just come from Zante and two from Patras laden with currants and muscatel and two from San Lucar with 200 casks of wine.  They say that the Earl of Cumberland has taken the island of Teneriffe in the Canaries.  Whether this is true time will show.
  Three vessels have arrived this week from Venice laden with currants, muscatel and the like.
  Up to now the English merchants have not yet decided what place to select for their cloth trade, for the deputies they sent for this purpose to Holland have not yet returned.  Last Thursday four ships with the usual cargoes left here for Staden and Hamburg, but they are still lying off the mouth of the Thames, as an express messenger was sent after them yesterday to stop them.  The reason is this, that the Merchant Adventurers have heard that they are not wanted there.  How this will be settled we shall know in time.  A finer crop of corn stands in the fields than has been seen for twenty years, thank God.  May the Almighty grant a continuance of fine weather so that we may be freed from the scarcity!

307-308.  Eight Prizes at Plymouth
              Middelburg 
              July 16, 1598.
  The English are still doing great harm at sea.  They have again seized and brought into Plymouth 8 vessels bound for Bayonne laden with corn.  If this goes on long it will cause grievous loss to traders.
  The English clothsellers are taking very long over their decision.  Their deputies returned from The Hague yesterday.  It is hoped that they will come to an agreement and go to Staden next year.  The opinion is that they are not going to make up their minds beforehand, but wish to wait and see how the war turns out.  The States General at The Hague are also undecided about this.

308.  English Raiders recalled
              Antwerp
              July 23, 1598.
  From England comes the positive assertion that this Queen has sent orders on pain of death to all freebooters at sea to leave the sea and come home.  The States General have again sent deputies to England, among them Count William of Nassau.  They are to discuss how to attain peace or whether the war is to be carried on longer.

308.  English Cloth sold at Middelburg
              Meddelburg
              July 23, 1598.
  As the English have not managed to obtain as many privileges as they had desired, they have determined not to conclude a fresh agreement, but to come here in their vessels as usual, sell their cloth and await their opportunity.  Their mouths still water for Staden, and their hopes are centred on the conclusion of a general peace, and on their being able to come to Staden.  But the other party here does not wish to trade with them, for they waste a great quantity of goods.  Peace with France is concluded and the Queen of England leans strongly towards peace, but here the Spaniards are distrusted.

308-309.  Portugal raided
              Rome
              July 27, 1598.
  By letters from Lisbon we learn that the English made a descent four miles from there and carried off a lot of cattle without meeting any resistance.  All over Portugal unprecedented scarcity prevails.
  We hear from India that the Portuguese have again discovered nine mines very rich in gold and silver.  The Spaniards have arranged with the King of Calicut to conquer with his assistance the island of Ceylon.  From this place much spice will be brought.

309.  Development of London Trade
              London
              28 July 1598.
  Nothing has come in from the sea this week, only the usual vessels from Amsterdam and Holland bringing much valuable merchandise, as the Merchant Adventurers have placed large orders.  Hamburg has stopped sending, and they are trying to forbid our going to India.  The English are beginning to send a lot of stuff to Middelburg and think of remaining there this winter as well.
  The deputies from the States General arrived here this week, to arrange peace or war.  They had an audience with the Queen to-day, but their proposals are not yet known.  Of the Earl of Cumberland there is no news.
  Verone Martens here has failed, but still remains in his house.  He owes more than £12,000, and it is a dangerous time for trade.

309.  Hopes of a General Peace
              London
              August 1, 1598.
  Whether our emissaries in France will do any good with the King we do not know.  The emissaries of the States General are still here.  They demand continuance of the war with Spain, so Her Majesty has despatched six of her Privy Councillors to discuss these important matters from day to day.  The plain man hopes a general peace will be attained.
  The English have arrived at Middelburg with their cloth, bringing a large consignment.  Trade on the Elbe, Ems and other rivers is forbidden to us.  Each man grudges the other a scrap of bread.
  We have heard nothing of the sea or of the Earl of Cumberland.

310.  Good Harvest in England.  Corn cheaper
              London
              August 19, 1598.
  The weather for the new crops remains splendid and they are being carried very dry for the most part.  Corn is much cheaper in the country.
  The English merchants are determined to settle at Middelburg and sell cloth.  Their representatives did not receive so favourable an answer as they had hoped from the States General at the Hague.
  We do not hear a word of the Earl of Cumberland.  It appears that he has not done much.  A vessel with 280 barrels of sugar has taken a month to come here from Spain, but can tell us nothing of Cumberland.
  About peace we have nothing to say either, because no conclusion has been arrived at, and negotiations are kept secret, but a week ago the emissary arrived with the answer of the States General of Holland, and it is hoped that either peace or war will soon be decided on.

310.  English Trade in the Spanish Netherlands
              Antwerp
              August 29, 1598.
  There are strong hopes here that peace with England will be reached; indeed it is confidently asserted that orders have been sent to three towns in Flanders by the Court here to allow the English there to trade freely with their own goods.  Customs alone are to be levied in accordance with long established usage.  And the Flanders people are to be allowed to trade with England.  In this way peace will probably result.

310-311.  The Earl of Cumberland brings in Thirty Prizes
              Antwerp
              September 15, 1598.
  From Middelburg we hear that the English have arrived with 20 vessels laden with some 40,000 cloths, but they may not sell them till all are stacked in their warehouses.  They will have a good market, as has already been seen in Holland.
  Amsterdam reports that the Earl of Cumberland has again reached England, bringing with him 30 vessels captured from the Spaniards.

311.  Large Sales of Cloth at Middelburg.
              Cologne
              October 7, 1598.
  The English have already sold 12,000 pieces of cloth to Holland alone, and English cloth comes here every day from Holland.  The patterns designed for Germany, however, will probably remain on their hands, as import is universally forbidden, even through Hamburg.

311.  Porto Rico taken by the English
              Antwerp
              October 10, 1598.
  News comes that the English have taken the island of Porto Rico in India, but that the fort is still apparently holding out.

311.  It was looted and abandoned
              Antwerp
              October 23, 1598.
  They write from Holland that news comes from England that Lord Cumberland has returned to England.  He was unable to take Porto Rico permanently but pillaged the place and then abandoned it.  He has brought with him to England a quantity of loot and 150 brass guns.

311-312.  Debts of the States General to England
              Middelburg
              November 15, 1598.
  There is not much news from London, but the States General of these countries have made up their accounts with the Queen and appear to owe Her Majesty 39 tons of gold.  They have promised to repay this in twelve years, and will put down 300,000 Rhinegulden yearly.  In return Her Majesty releases all towns pledged to her for this purpose.  The States General have also sent men down the Rhine, as the enemy is said to be very strong there.
  On the other hand, the English have had a good market for their cloths and within two days have sold over 10,000 pieces, though this is a small amount compared with the 60,000 pieces they have brought.

312.  Not all the Portuguese Fleet is safe
              Madrid
              November 20, 1598.
  Letters of the 7th November from Lisbon report that the Portuguese fleet has come in safe with the exception of one vessel belonging to the General of the Fleet, and captured by the English near San Michele.  They have also taken in the harbour off Lisbon a vessel coming from Havana with passengers and 40,000 ducats and reals.  They have pillaged and taken home with them also a vessel bound from Lisbon to Angola, another off Cape Verde, and again another from Biscay.

312.  The Irish again
              Antwerp
              November 21, 1598.
  From Middelburg we learn that the Irish have beaten the English again, and will end by driving the Queen’s troops out of Ireland.  Another plot has been made against her life.
  It is also reported that the Earl of Cumberland has not brought back any very great wealth to England.  Dysentery was so serious among his men that he had to hasten home, and had no time to go out after loot.
  A fleet is equipping in Spain to fetch gold and silver, and is expected in February.

312.  Arming by Spain and England
              Antwerp
              January 6, 1599.
  They write from London that Hollander and Zeelander vessels are being detained in Spain and that the King is fitting out a strong Armada.  So the Queen is arming heavily on land and sea, and the Earl of Essex will proceed to Ireland next March with 20,000 men.

313.  James VI appointed Heir to the English Crown
              Venice
              February 5, 1599.
  An English vessel, having first of all accompanied others to Lisbon, has returned thence to England laden with sugar, although it was nominally bound for this place.  Therefore merchants here are seeking some way of detaining in our port four English vessels in order that the ships may be able to sail home in spite of the detention ordered in Spain.  We also learn that the English have captured 23 vessels with munitions and general merchandise bound for Spain and Ireland.
  As the Queen of England, besides the cancer in one breast, has also been attacked by fever so that her life is in danger, she has made a will appointing the King of Scots heir to her kingdom, but on condition of his making incessant war on the King of Spain.  She has also given instructions how this can be done.

313.  A large Army for Ireland
              Antwerp
              February 12, 1599.
  Reports reach Zeeland from England that naval and military preparations against Ireland grow daily greater.  A powerful army is to go there to intimidate the country.  Through recruiting, the numbers of the woolweavers begin to shrink so that English cloth has already grown dearer.

313.  The Pope should help the Irish
              Rome
              February 13, 1599.
  The Spanish Ministers would be gratified if the Pope sent some pecuniary assistance for the war in Ireland against the Queen of England.  This would prevent the King of France from helping this Queen.

313-314.  Danish, French, Scotch and Dutch Ships must not be robbed
              Cologne
              March 20, 1599.
  The Queen of England has let it be known that friendly relations must on pain of death be maintained with the Kings of Denmark, France and Scotland and the States General of Holland and Zeeland.  Their ships must be neither robbed nor in any other way molested.

314.  Gold for England
              Antwerp
              April 9, 1599.
  The ship of Mr. Muscheron, living at Middelburg, is said to have reached England from the island of Principe near St. Thomas and to have on board goods to the value of 500,000 gold marks.
  Holland and Zeeland report that they are hard at work equipping ships of war.  The Queen of England also seems to be fitting out a good number of her largest ships to send out with other English ships and ships belonging to the States General.  Their destination is unknown.

314.  Doubts about the Turkish Fleet
              Rome
              April 10, 1599.
  By letters of the 19th ult. from Messina we learn that the Turk is to put to sea a fleet of 200 sail and that the Queen of England has offered him the assistance of 25 ships, but on condition of their being used against Spain alone.  So preparations are going on hard all over Sicily but most of all at Messina.  So large a fleet from the Turks is not feared, however, as it is thought that at most they will be able with the utmost exertions to fit out 100 ships only, owing to their great lack of wood and of rowers.  Another vessel from England has arrived at Messina laden on the top with nothing but edibles, but underneath have been found many cannon balls and 40 guns.  These and the whole contents of the ship have been sent to the Viceroy at Palermo.  They were intending to take it all to Constantinople.

314-315.  The Dutch in the Straits of Magellan
              Frankfort
              April 15, 1599.
  It is confirmed from Holland that the States General have forbidden all trade and navigation to Spain.  They have also ordered that all merchants and skippers who have sustained loss through the detention of their ships and wish to avenge themselves should report to the States General and take out Letters of Marque so that they may be enabled to attack and plunder all Spanish ships and property at sea.
  Amsterdam reports that their three warships which sailed from Rotterdam to the Straits of Magellan with a Frenchman have already seized a vessel from East India with a very rich cargo of gold, silver and general goods, and thrown overboard every Spaniard they found.  The booty has been divided.  The Rotterdamers have sailed back to the Straits of Magellan, and the Frenchman has come to La Rochelle.  This has spread terror among the Spaniards.

315.  Old Mexico
              Venice
              April 30, 1599.
  Of the Indian fleet only one galleon with two millions in gold and a large quantity of cochineal has remained behind.  The newly arrived fleet informs us also that the Spaniards have conquered a new kingdom in India called Old Mexico.  It is inhabited by intelligent people who are to be instructed in the Christian faith.  Very rich gold and silver mines exist there also.

315.  The English allowed to trade with Spain
              Antwerp
              May 1, 1599.
  There is a lot of talk here about peace developments between Spain and England, and the Queen of England has already announced that any one is free to go to Spain with merchandise.  The English are very anxious to go there.
  Further news comes from London that the Earl of Essex in person and his Armada have gone to Ireland.  The rebel Earl of Tyrone is said to be a fugitive, and to have suffered a great reverse from the Viceroy of Ireland.

315-316.  The Dutch try to stop this
              Amsterdam
              May 4, 1599.
  A London letter states that they have confirmation from Ireland of the arrival there of the Earl of Essex and of his getting the rebellion under.  The Swedish ambassador has had an audience with Her Majesty in the name of Duke Charles, and asked that the friendly relations may continue.  The Queen of England is in good health.  On St. George’s Day she made three Englishmen Knights of the Garter, as well as the landgrave of Hesse.
  The English merchants are much surprised and disgusted that the States General of Holland and Zeeland should try to forbid not only their own subjects, but every one else, to trade with Spain, and that they should respect neither friend nor foe, so that business is made very bad.
  background: Duke Charles, 1550-1611, became King of Sweden in 1604 as Charles IX.  He fought against his Catholic nephew, King Sigismund of Poland.
  Maurice, Landgrave of Hesse-Cassel, 1572-1632.  He abdicated in 1626.

316.  Tension between the Dutch and English in the combined Fleet
              Antwerp
              June 15, 1599.
  About the disposition of the Dutch fleet we have hitherto heard nothing.  But letters from England relate that 48 English warships joined the Dutch fleet off the English coast.  The English wanted to appoint an Admiral over the combined fleet, but the Dutch would not agree and chose an Admiral of their own.  So they were at loggerheads.  But the Queen intervened and made Don Antonio of Portugal’s son, Don Emanuel, married to the daughter of the Prince of Orange, Admiral of the combined fleet.  So with him it then sailed away.

316-317.  Have the Dutch raided San Lucar, or have they suffered in a storm?
              Antwerp
              June 15, 1599.
  We hear from England that a yacht has come from the Dutch Armada with news that it left them in the habour of San Lucar.  In this harbour they found the Spanish fleet laden with mixed cargoes for India, plundered it, and burnt some vessels.  Thus they have caused great losses and there will probably be many failures.
  On the other hand, others say that the Armada of the English and Dutch has been scattered by storms, that many ships are lost, and that many have been sunk and taken by the Spanish galleons.  What is true in all this we shall only find out by letters from Spain.

317.  Sea-fight between English and Danes
              Cologne
              June 18, 1599.
  We learn here from Hamburg that they are saying there that the King of Denmark has not betaken himself to Scotland, but to the Russian frontier.  On the way seven well-armed English vessels going to St. Nicholas seem to have met him.  They were instructed to cast anchor, but they refused and fired at the Danes.  The Danes replied, and after they had fought each other for two days and a night two of the English ships were at last sunk.  The other five ships were taken, and will have to pay dearly for this dispute.  The King of Denmark is said to be minded in consequence to forbid the English and Dutch to go to St. Nicholas.

317.  The Dutch make 400 per cent. by trade with India
              Cologne
              June 25, 1599.
  Amsterdam confirms the arrival there of four vessels from Calicut.  They have brought so much spice that those who sent cargoes out have made four ducats for one, and this will encourage others to undertake voyages of the kind.  The spice trade of the Spanish and Portuguese will be greatly weakened.  The Indians have rebelled against them and called the Dutch in to help.  Their envoys from Calicut have been in Holland and have returned home with handsome presents.

318.  Anglo-Dutch Fleet off Lisbon.  Will the Genoese help Spain?
              Venice
              July 2, 1599.
  Genoese letters report that 200 English and Dutch vessels have been seen at sea off Lisbon, thus causing great fear to the town as well as to the entire kingdom of Spain, for in that harbour there is no fleet fit to offer any resistance.  His Majesty has therefore sent an express messenger to Prince Doria at Genoa asking him to go to Lisbon at once with his galleys.

318.  Rome says the Spanish Armada is sailing for England
              Rome
              July 3, 1599.
  We hear from Spain that the main Spanish Armada is to sail for England on the last day of June, and that Adelentado is to be in command at sea and the Count de Fuentes on land.

318.  Trade hampered everywhere
              Amsterdam
              July 24, 1599.
  All we hear from England is that the Hamburg emissaries have left with an unfavourable answer and have achieved nothing.  This will not help much.  Moreover, that ships lately mentioned laden with cloth have been forbidden from London to go either to Hamburg or to Staden.  It is also averred that no ship from the Elbe will be allowed to put into an English port.  This will not bring the English any profit.  A ship laden with ginger is said to have come in there from the high sea.
  About the Dutch fleet nothing has been heard, and there is no news of importance about the Irish war, but there is a statement from another source that the Danes have taken four English ships at sea.  This will do nobody any good.

319.  The English must send Ships to India too
              London
              August 7, 1599.
  From the sea and from Ireland there is nothing of importance to chronicle this week.  The wild Irish take to the bush and the woods so that they cannot be got at.  Orders come from Court to get ready 12 warships and 3000 men at once.  Their destination is unknown.
  The arrival of the four ships at Amsterdam has caused great astonishment in England, so merchants here are thinking of fitting out 12 vessels at once and sending them to the East Indies to import spices.

319.  Activity of the Dutch both eastwards and westwards
              Antwerp
              August 21, 1599.
  Advices from Middelburg of the 17th inst. state that the Dutch fleet has certainly taken the island of Canary, and made a very rich capture.  A large number of ships are to sail from there to Spain, and four ships are being got ready at Rotterdam and two in Holland to go to the Indies.  They write from Ireland that the English have not been able hitherto to get control, and have been beaten by the Irish several times.  So the Queen has lately sent over 8000 men.
  Between the Queen of England and the King of Scots great discord has arisen.  The Queen is putting 40,000 soldiers on a war footing, and the English Parliament is giving every assistance, and is extremely hostile to the King of Scots.

319.  Trouble in Scotland and Ireland
              Amsterdam
              August 21, 1599.
  They write from London that the King of Scots wishes to know whether after the death of the Queen he is to succeed her or not.  He has created his son Prince of Wales, so 40,000 men have been armed in England against Scotland.
  The English are doing very badly in Ireland.

320.  Only the French and English may trade with Turkey
              Lyons
              September 19, 1599.
  We are advised from Marseilles that the Turk forbids all Christians except the French and English to sail to or trade with this country on pain of confiscation of property, because he has heard of a projected alliance against him.  This is hard to believe, as it would cause the Venetians much loss.

320.  The Prince of Juliers again ill
              Cologne
              September 30, 1599.
  The Prince of Juliers is again suffering from melancholia as he was six years ago.  The Princess and the Archduchess Sibilla are said to be on bad terms, because the Princess tries to assume control of the government.  London letters report that the Queen there is in good health.  The war scare has died down again and peace is hoped for.

320.  Spaniards again in Ireland
              Venice
              October 1, 1599.
  The announcement reaches here that some ships of the Spanish Armada have got to Ireland with 3000 Spaniards and that these men have killed 800 English.  They are making the natives swear allegiance to their King.  But the most important fortress is still in English hands.

320.  Armistice in Ireland.  Arrest of Essex
              London
              October 23, 1599.
  All I have to chronicle is that our Queen’s Commander-in-Chief in Ireland, the Earl of Essex, has arrived here, having arranged an armistice with the recalcitrant Irish.  Her Majesty is displeased with this, and has had the Earl arrested and placed in safe custody in the mansion of the Lord Chancellor.  There is a strong rumour that the Queen is about to enter into negotiations for peace with Spain, but no envoys have yet been despatched.
  background: See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 207, Death Sentence on Essex.

321.  Armistice in Ireland
              Antwerp
              October 30, 1599.
  All we hear from England this week is that peace with Ireland is as good as concluded, and that the Queen has arranged a five month’s armistice.

321.  Rumours of Peace with Spain
              Antwerp
              November 5, 1599.
  A messenger recently sent by the Archduke Albert to the Queen of England has returned to Brussels with her answer.  The Queen is ready to enter into negotiations for peace, but the meeting must take place at Boulogne, not Calais.  She has also sent to the States General of Holland to consult them and learn their wishes.  She has informed them that she hopes to obtain the wished for favourable peace from His Serene Highness.
  We hear also from London that 1100 men have made a mutual agreement and subscribed £40,000 with a view to trade in India.  But, when they requested the Queen’s permission for the purpose, she began by asking whether they would not prefer trade with Spain.  On their giving an affirmative answer the Queen signified that they should wait a little while as she was engaged in negotiations with Spain from which she hoped for a good result.  The men were satisfied with this.
  It is also announced that the Irish are reconciled with the Queen of England, and have handed over their ports to her, so that Spain will no longer sail to Ireland and cause unrest among the natives.  But this is incredible, as the Queen has imprisoned her Commander-in-Chief, Lord Essex, for coming from Ireland to London without the Queen’s orders.  As this nobleman is very popular, not only among the nobility but among the common people, there is much anxiety as to the effect of this in England.

322.  The Queen’s Presents to the Sultan
              Venice
              November 5, 1599.
  The presents sent by the Queen of England to the Sultan are said to be a very handsome timepiece and a coach with silver mountings, in addition to many other things, notably some fine pewterwork.

322.  Debts of Philip II to be paid by Philip III
              Rome
              December 11, 1599.
  As the King of Spain of most blessed memory has left a large quantity of debts behind him, the present King has been advised that in the interest of the country His Majesty ought to pay the debts.  A tax is therefore to be imposed on every measure of grain or flour, and it is hoped thereby to collect five millions in gold.  His subjects are to have all their double crowns and silver dollars exchanged.  They are to be broken up and smaller coins minted from them.  Also no large sum in gold may for the future be sent out of Spain.

322.  The China Trade
              Amsterdam
              December 18, 1599.
  A vessel richly laden with gold and silk is said to have reached England from China after a three years’ voyage.
  It is also confirmed that our Armada has captured some 20 Spanish ships estimated at 10 millions.

322-323.  Peace Rumours disbelieved
              Cologne
              December 19, 1599.
  Nobody will believe until it is made public that the peace between England and Spain is making progress.  The Hollanders and Zeelanders are forming various projects in opposition, and an influential person hears from London under date December 15 that the Queen has been arming with vigour of late and recruiting troops, for the most part horse.  The troops she has had in Ireland are being removed and replaced by others.  Some fresh emissaries have come to England from Holland and Zeeland, to submit new proposals to the Queen.  These were read to the Privy Council in presence of the Queen and at once approved.  The Queen will assist the Dutch with money and continue the war.  As the Dutch are in alliance with the German Princes, the Archduke Albert will doubtless have to set to work to crush them.

323.  Liberation of Catholics in England
              Cologne
              January 9, 1600.
  An ordinary messenger from Antwerp has just come with letters of the 5th inst. to the effect that a special messenger from England to Brussels has passed through with a packet of letters for President Richardot, stating that the Queen of England has liberated all Catholics imprisoned for many years, and not only admitted them to the City of London but given them permission to live where they please in that town or within five miles round.  It is presumed that the Queen is willing to follow the example of the King of France, because she has seen and still sees that all over France the King’s subjects are on friendly terms with each other about religion.  From this good news it may be hoped that after all peace will ultimately be made.

323.  Hopes of Peace
              Antwerp
              January 24, 1600.
  Peace with England is hoped for here, and an envoy from the Queen is expected at Court to begin negotiations.
  The messenger who came from London this week asserts that Lord Essex is dead.

323-324.  Detention of English Ships at Venice
              Venice
              February 18, 1600.
  Those merchants who suffered loss through the vessel taken, as recently reported, by the English, have obtained from the authorities here the detention of English ships in our harbours.  Those ready to sail are being obliged to disembark.

324.  Sacrilege again by an Englishman in Rome
              Rome
              February 26, 1600.
  On Saturday evening an Englishman dressed as a priest and housed in a monastery was handed over to the Holy Office for having smashed a font and hurled it to the ground.

324.  Gifts from the Sultan to the Queen
              Venice
              March 3, 1600.
  We are advised from Constantinople that the Sultan has sent magnificent gifts of rubies, pearls and diamonds to the Queen of England with a request that she should effect a peace between him and His Imperial Majesty.

324.  The English annoyed with the Venetians
              Venice
              March 17, 1600.
  English merchants here are greatly disgusted at the detention of their ships and goods for reasons unknown, and are awaiting information from England with great eagerness.

324.  Rumoured Betrothal of Archduke Mathias and Arabella Stuart
              Venice
              March 31, 1600.
  Peace between England and Archduke Albert is considered here to be more or less settled, and representatives of both sides are said to be meeting at Boulogne.  It is also alleged that a marriage is being negotiated between the Archduke Mathias and a cousin of the Queen of England, who is successor to the throne.

324-325.  Restoration of Venetian Property by the English
              Venice
              April 14, 1600.
  Owing to the arrest of English ships that has resulted, the Queen of England has given strict orders that all goods of Venetian merchants still at disposal are to be returned to their owners and what is lost is to be paid for to the last penny.

325.  An English Representative reaches Venice
              Venice
              May 5, 1600.
  A few days ago an English nobleman arrived to make arrangements in his Queen’s name with those merchants on the Piazza here who suffered loss by the pillage of a ship.

325.  Probable Marriage between Archduke Maximilian and Arabella Stuart
              Venice
              June 2, 1600.
  As for the peace negotiations between England and Spain, discussion will probably include a marriage between the Archduke Maximilian and the Queen of England’s cousin, who is heir to this kingdom.  Although the Turk is vehemently opposed to this peace, and has offered the Queen a strong fleet and many troops to serve against Spain, it is hoped he will fail in his object.

325.  Joyful Return of the English East Indian Fleet
              Cologne
              June 9, 1600.
  The arrival in England of four ships from the East Indies, and besides these of two from the West Indies, has been announced quite recently.  Two of them have already come to Middelburg and were met by two companies of trainbands with music playing and welcomed with joy bells as well.  Although these vessels have brought a quantity of spices they had not enough money to load their holds right up.  One of the vessels, worth more than the two that have come here, was lost near England.  Their cargo consists of 90 loads of pepper, 7 loads of cloves, 8000 lbs. of mace and a small amount of nutmegs.  They took 14 months on the outward, 6 on the homeward voyage, and lay still seven months loading.
  background: See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 214, England, Holland, and World Trade.

326.  Solemn Reception of Converts at Rome
              Rome
              August 12, 1600.
  Last Sunday the Confraternity of the Holy Trinity escorted in procession to St. Peter’s the recently mentioned English, Scotch, Genevese and Germans, some forty persons, who have embraced the Roman religion.  There they recanted in presence of the Governor and Auditor of the Camera and of the patriarch and many other notables.  The Pope gave them his blessing from a window of the new palace and caused the spear with which the side of Christ was pierced to be shown to them and his own countenance to boot.  Also he had them escorted to the palace where the poor priests are lodged and commanded his servant to give them a sufficiency for their sustenance.

326.  Spain and Ireland again
              Brussels
              August 16, 1600.
  It is rumoured that the King of Spain is raising many troops to equip an Armada and some thousands of men for Ireland.  We understand that a distinguished Irish gentleman is affording His Majesty every assistance and handing over some seaports so that the King may be able to attack England to greater advantage.  As a surety of good faith the gentleman is said to have sent one of his sons to Spain to serve there as a page.  The Irish on their side will attack bravely, but on the other hand, the Queen of England appears to be minded also to send an Armada to Ireland.

326-327.  Mystery Ships for Pirates
              Venice
              September 8, 1600.
  News comes here that Amurad Reis met two English ships not far from the gulf here.  When the latter caught sight of him they made off in small boats, leaving only eight persons on the large vessels.  But they had previously set light to them so that the powder was bound to go off at a certain moment.  So when the Turks went on to the English ships and were pillaging, the fire spread and the ammunition blew up.  On one ship 150 Turks were blown up and their ship also was lost.  When Amurad saw this he sailed off in a panic, so that the English recovered the remaining ship and brought her in here.

327.  Persia to be opened for Trade and Residence
              Antwerp
              October 13, 1600.
  Some people here have received news that the King of Fez and Morocco has sent an embassy to the Queen of England, but its object is unknown.  We hear from Emden that an envoy has arrived from the King of Persia with a suite of sixty people.  They are to journey on to His Imperial majesty at Prague and offer him much assistance against the Turks.  They are ready also to allow all Christians to trade freely in their country, and to be exempt from dues.  They will allow them free exercise of their religion and will build churches.  This would be of the greatest use and advantage to the whole of Christendom.  They have already been 17 months on the journey.

327.  Embassies from Morocco and Moscow in London
              Antwerp
              October 15, 1600.
  We hear from Holland that the visit of the embassy of the King of Morocco to the Queen of England has taken place on the instigation of the Earl of Cumberland.  Since this a mission from Moscow has likewise arrived in London.

327.  More English Ships for the East Indies
              Antwerp
              October 26, 1600.
  They write from England that four large ships on which 800 soldiers are to be put, four similar ones in Zeeland, and a certain number in Holland are being kept ready to sail in company to East India. 

328.  Formation of Trading Companies in Holland
              Cologne
              November 17, 1600.
  We are advised from Holland that some syndicates have already finished the equipment of their ships and will sail off with the first fair wind.  Those of the old Company will follow them.  Monseigneur Caron is having a ship built to send to China.
  Very little is heard of the progress of the negotiations for peace between England and Spain.

328.  What the Moroccans and Muscovites are after is unknown
              Antwerp
              November 224, 1600.
  As it is kept a great secret we cannot yet find out what the envoys of the King of Morocco have effected with the Queen of England.
  Since this another envoy has arrived there from the Prince of Muscovy.
  Nothing is known of his plans either, but some English believe that he has come about the trade which the English have at Moscow.

328.  Dutch and English Indian Trade unwelcome to the Portuguese
              Antwerp
              December 15, 1600.
  Amsterdam letters tell us merely that things are very quiet there, but that any day 13 ships from there, 5 or 6 from Zeeland, and 12 from England may start for East India.  This is how this navigation is kept up, and when these vessels return successful it will increase still more, a thing which ill suits the Portuguese and their voyages to India.

328-329.  The Dutch will raid the Coast of Portugal
              Cologne
              December 29, 1600.
  The Holland and Zeeland ships equipped for the voyage to India have agreed with each other to sail on the account of one company with combined interests.  As the Portuguese are arming vigorously to stop the voyage, the Dutch are taking some warships with ammunition.  By the spring some 25 ships will have been fitted out to raid the coasts of Portugal, so the Portuguese will hardly be able to prevent the expedition.

329.  More Peace Rumours
              Antwerp
              January 12, 1601.
  News comes from Brussels this evening that the Queen of England has again written to His Serene Highness that both sides should meet to discuss peace afresh.  His Highness has agreed to the choice of a place of meeting, but with the reservation that His Highness should learn the wishes of the King of Spain beforehand.  The Lord grant this may go forward and peace may come!

329.  The Queen mortally ill.  James VI excluded from Succession
              Venice
              February 16, 1601.
  It is announced and confirmed from England that the Queen in Council has issued a decree entirely excluding the King of Scots from Succession to the throne, in order that her nation may not be under the rule of the son of a rebel mother.  She has also already despatched emissaries to negotiate peace with Spain, so that she may leave her kingdom at peace and transmit her Crown to one of her blood relations and assure her of undisturbed possession.  This has already been announced.  She does this because she is suffering from a fatal disease called St. Martha, so that but slight hope exists of a long life for her.

329-330.  The Essex Conspiracy
              Antwerp
              March 2, 1601.
  According to Zeeland letters they have had news from London that grave turmoil has been caused by four Lords or Earls.  They have taken up arms and a lot of people have been killed.  The Queen gave her pardon to the soldiers who supported the Lords, whereupon the deserted their masters.  Lord Essex, previously General in Ireland and later, on his return, long out of favour with the Queen, has been sent to prison because of this affair.  But who the other Earls were and why the disorder arose is not mentioned.

330.  Arabella Stuart to marry the Prince of Condé
              Venice
              March 16, 1601.
  During the last few days Don Sirley, an Englishman, arrived here in company with the Persian envoy and his suite.  They are to go subsequently to Florence, Rome, and then to Spain, in order to conclude with these powers an alliance against the Turks.
  We hear from London that in the recently mentioned disturbance which arose over the succession to the throne the Earl of Essex was the ringleader.  He has therefore been imprisoned, together with sixteen of his chief confederates.  The Queen is said to be inclined to marry her cousin to the Prince of Condé and he is to be made King.  The King of Scots is to be excluded from the succession.
  background: Sir Anthony Shirley or Sherley, 1565-1633.  He was at first a free-booter who made voyages to Venezuela and Colombia.  In 1599 he, his brother Robert and twenty-five companions were sent by Essex to Persia, where he was ceremoniously received and hospitably entertained by Shah Abbas the Great.  The Shah sent him as ambassador with a Mission to Europe to form an alliance of European sovereigns against the Turks.  Shirley went first to Prague, reached Rome in 1601, and then went to Venice, where he was arrested for intriguing against Turkey.  In 1605 he was sent to Morocco by Rudolph II, in 1609 he led a fleet against the Turks with marked lack of success, in 1610 he went to Madrid and was granted a pension by the King.  After losing this he remained on in Madrid.  He lived in Spain till his death, and left interesting memoirs behind him.

330-331.  The French intercede for Essex
              Antwerp
              March 16, 1601.
  We hear from England that, together with two or three other Earls, the Earl of Essex has been condemned to death but is not yet executed.  The King of France is said to have sent the Duc de Bouillon to the Queen of England to intercede for his life.  It is also rumoured that this conspiracy was directed against the Queen, and that the Earl meant to invade the kingdom with the help of the ships of the States General, which were pretending to be at sea on the look-out for the Spanish Armada.  Some of his confederates have already escaped, but others have been taken prisoner.  When the execution has been carried out, the Queen will publish the whole story in print.

331.  A Persian Embassy at Rome
              Rome
              April 4, 1601.
  The two Persian envoys made their entry here last Thursday.  The Pope sent out to meet them with a present of three fine horses elegantly caparisoned.  He caused them to be escorted by three hundred horses, and when they reached the Castle of St. Angelo they were received by the firing of the big gun.  They will be very handsomely entertained here at the cost of the Pope.  This embassy has orders to treat with the Pope, and to urge His Holiness and the Christian powers to war against the Turks, and to offer that the King of Persia shall likewise take the field against the hereditary foe with 150,000 horse and 60,000 foot.  The Christian Princes must engage not to make peace with the Turks without his knowledge.  In return he will grant permission to Christians in all his realms to trade, to build churches and convents according to Roman usage, and to live without let or hindrance.

331-332.  Quarrels of the Persian Embassy
              Rome
              April 15, 1601.
  Up to date the Pesian envoys, being unable to agree about precedence, have not had an audience with His Holiness; but it will take place to-morrow.  The Pope has commanded them in the meanwhile to have their documents empowering them to act and their letters of presentation translated.  The Englishman is to have precedence, but the suites have fallen out with one another because the Persians will not do as they are told.  They have demanded the return of their letters, but this is refused, and in the meanwhile they have armed themselves with daggers.

332.  The Essex Conspiracy.  Executions
              Antwerp
              April 16, 1601.
  Letters from London arriving here this week announce that the whole country is quiet again, and that little is to be heard about the Essex conspiracy.  His Master of Ceremonies and Secretary have since been executed like their master.  It is not known whether others will follow.  The Earl was to have negotiated peace with Spain, but as he is no longer alive there is curiosity as to what the Queen will do now.
  Other letters from London report that a brilliant embassy from the King of Scots has arrived there, and it is thought that this King, being of the blood royal of England, will claim the succession.
background: See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 222, Execution of Essex.

332.  The Persians received by the Pope
              Rome
              April 26, 1601.
  The Anglo-Persian envoy had an audience with the Pope last Wednesday and delivered his letters of presentation and power to act.  These documents allege that he is the real envoy and the Persian only his assistant.  The Pope gave audience to the Persian envoy the same day, and he, after kneeling thrice, kissed the foot of the Pope in his King’s name.  Then, in accordance with their custom, he seated himself on a cushion and handed the Pope a letter of which the purport is the offer of an alliance by the King.

333-333.  Tension between England and Scotland
              Antwerp
              June 1, 1601.
  We are advised from England that the envoy of the King of Scots has parted from the Queen in high dudgeon.  This is believed to have occurred over the English Crown which the King has requested for his son, but the Queen will not announce who is to succeed after her demise.

333.  The Persians leaving Rome
              Rome
              June 2, 1601.
  The Anglo-Persian envoy left here last Wednesday.  The Persian will follow him after corpus Christi Day, as he wishes to see the ceremony before going.  Both will proceed to France.

333.  Lenient Treatment of some Essex Conspirators
              Antwerp
              June 22, 1601.
  They write from London on the 14th inst. that the adherents of the Earl of Essex have not been executed but have been fined £20 to£30.
  An envoy from the King of Scots is said to have been dismissed by the Queen with a favourable answer.

333.  Duke Charles of Sweden
              Hamburg
              July 6, 1601.
  The English envoy despatched by the Queen to the Prince of Muscovy has been away thirteen months.  He arrived here via Lübeck from Reval this week with a suite of sixty and announces that Duke Charles of Sweden has beaten the Poles, and has now arrived with his forces before Riga, which he intends to capture.  He now terms himself Duke of Sweden and Governor of Livonia.  At Reveal the English envoy was invited by Duke Charles of Sweden to stand godfather to his child.

333-334.  Nineteen Dutch and English Ships for the East Indies
              Antwerp
              July 26, 1601.
  Amsterdam letters of the 16th inst. report that the twelve Holland and Zeeland ships sailing to the East Indies have been joined by seven English ships for the same destination.  They met twelve Spanish galleys and fought them for some time, but what vessels have been lost on the two sides is not yet known.

334.  The Spaniards besiege Ostend
              Antwerp
              August 3, 1601.
  We do not hear that His Serene Highness has thus far accomplished anything of value before Ostend.  He has apparently taken a trench, but this is not much use, as the States General have thrown up an entrenchment outside the fortress, which they hold with 3000 men.  His Highness has not been able to block the harbour either, as four English warships are lying off it on guard.  Any day 4000 English soldiers may come to Ostend and 500 nobles at their own expense, so that the capture will be arduous for His Highness and cost him dear in time and men.  His Highness is not yet lavishly provided with troops for the siege either.  An Englishman diguised as a farmer recently went to Maestricht, to find out whether the town could be captured by treachery, but he was caught and brought a prisoner to His Highness in camp.

334.  The Spaniards besiege Ostend
              Antwerp
              September 9, 1601.
  At Ostend there is no change, and the entrance to the port is not closed.  The storms have done much damage both to the town and also to our camp.  They write from the camp that His Highness had come to an arrangement with some of the English nobles in Ostend for the surrender of the town, but this was discovered, and the Englishmen were arrested and the ringleaders taken to Flushing.  Nevertheless His Highness is resolved to continue the siege of Ostend.

334-335.  50 per cent. Profit for Dutch Shareholders
              Cologne
              September 9, 1601.
  We are advised from Amsterdam on the 3rd inst. that the profits of the four East Indian vessels recently arrived are to be distributed to shareholders.  Each one is to receive 50 per cent.  Pending the arrival of the other two vessels belonging to this Company, three more ships are to sail for East India this autumn.

335.  Spaniards in Ireland to be starved out
              Antwerp
              December 21, 1601.
  News comes from London that the English Governor in Ireland holds the Spaniards so closely in their redoubt that they cannot get out to fetch provisions.  Notwithstanding that eight vessels have come for them from Hamburg with food and munitions, the English seem to mean to starve the Spaniards out.

335.  Peace certain
              Venice
              January 2, 1604.
  Peace between England and Spain will certainly be concluded, so the Customs dues imposed in Spain will be abolished again.

335.  Execution of Raleigh
              Cologne
              January 8, 1604.
  We are informed from various sources that Sir Walter Raleigh and other nobles in England have been executed.

335.  He is to be imprisoned for life instead
              Antwerp
              January 9, 1604.
  London letters of the 19th ult. state that Sir Raleigh was led to the place of execution, but an order was at once sent by the King that he was to be taken back to prison.  So it is thought that he may be imprisoned for life.  It is announced that the King will conclude peace between Spain and England without delay.

335.  Pardon of Don Antonio Perez
              Rome
              January 16, 1604.
  Don Antonio Perez, who formerly escaped from Spain, has obtained pardon from his King and desires to return to Spain.

336.  Fresh Wealth in Peru
              Venice
              February 13, 1604.
  We hear from Seville that a new island, very rich in gold and silver, has been discovered in the West Indies.  It is said to measure 2600 miles in circumference.  Five hundred ecclesiastics have gone on the fleet to Peru and New Spain in the hope of bringing this island under the dominion of the King of Spain.

336.  England still supporting the States General
              Antwerp
              February 27, 1604.
  Just recently we have heard nothing from England worth writing down, but from Holland they write that three Regiments of Swiss are to join the States General.  Under a General named Vere they are waiting for 7000 English and Scotch soldiers.  This does not look as if the King of England was abandoning the States General.  Moreover, they are sending a large embassy with handsome presents and twenty-one fine horses to accompany Count John of Nassau and other emissaries to England.  How the embassy and gifts will be received by the King time will show.
  background: John, called The Monk, Count of Nassau and Siegen, 1561-1624, a soldier.  He served first of all in the army of the Low countries insurgents, and then in Sweden.

336-337.  England inclined for War rather than peace
              Antwerp
              March 12, 1604.
  We hear from London under date 27th ult. that the Constable of Castile asks to discuss peace with England in Flanders.  But as no conclusion about this has been reached in England he is going over there shortly.  The States General wish to hand over East and West India to England, but the English Council inclines to war rather than to peace.  Four vessels will be quite ready to start for India at the end of this month.
  Antonio Perez, too, is in England, and he will not do the cause of Spain any good with the King.  So peace is still very doubtful.
  Great preparations have been made for the entry of the King which is due to take place on the 15th unst., but whether it will do so is unknown, for last week alone there wee thirteen deaths of plague.

337-338.  Fresh Troops for Zeeland together with peace Overtures
              Antwerp
              March 14, 1604.
  Letters of the 5th inst. from London report that the King, in order, like the late Queen, to maintain friendship with the States General, is continuing to afford them assistance.  For this purpose he has sent 3000 soldiers to Zeeland, and some thousands more are to follow.  But he has no objection to the King of Spain raising as many troops as himself.
  Moreover, His Majesty has published a decree that all Jesuits, Seminarists and Popish priests must be gone from the country by the 20th inst. on pain of death.  Whether this will promote peace remains to be seen.  It is not known whether Parliament will meet this month.
  The Constable of Castile is making great preparations for his journey to England, and the King of Spain seems to count on peace between himself and England as a certainty.  The King of England has said too that he is no foe of Spain, and that therefore the matter is not pressing, as the only problem is the confirmation of the ancient friendship, and the Constable will be welcome whenever he comes.  But the King of England will insist that his subjects have the right to go to East India and other places outside the dominions of the King of Spain.
  Also, despite frequent requests, the King of England has not consented to give an audience to Antonio Perez, or to allow him a ship for his journey to France.  The King has had him informed that as he found people to bring him over to England without the King’s knowledge, they may as well take him back again.  So he will have to depart without an audience.
  The Dutch, who offered to hand over East and West India to the King, have received the answer that His Majesty does not desire this, that he has enough of his own, and that his only wish is to possess his countries in peace and quiet.
  background: See Fugger News-Letters (First Series), Letter 232, Expulsion of Catholics.

338.  Spanish Embassy for England
              Cologne
              March 25, 1604.
  Letters from Holland report that two Dutch ships and an English ship have taken a vessel bound from Curaçao to Portugal and shared the proceeds.  The Constable of Castile is having magnificent costumes made for his suite, in order that they may accompany him to England at the first moment possible.  He is also taking a very learned and distinguished man from Milan to be his spokesman.  He is to be accompanied by the Count von Arenberg, the President von Aerschote, and others.

338.  Still at Dunkirk
              Antwerp
              April 16, 1604.
  The Constable of Castile, who is to go to England, is still at Dunkirk, and the Count von Arenberg, who has had to stay here because of gout, may follow him any day.  There is no longer any doubt about peace with England.  However, the Spanish envoy in London is said to have asked the King there to tell him why he had expelled the ecclesiastics from his country, whereupon the King caused certain letters to be read to him describing the plot made by the clergy against the Crown of England.  But he seems to have granted the request of postponement of the date by which they had to be out of the country.  The King has also submitted the expulsion of the ecclesiastics to Parliament.

338-339.  James professes Indifference about the Spanish Embassy
              Rome
              April 24, 1604.
  Antonio Perez has come back to France again from England.  But they say he is not to be allowed to stay there any longer, and the yearly pension of 400 crowns granted him by the King and the guard of two Swiss are cancelled.  No doubt it was thought that he would have much influence with the King of England, but this was not the case.
  It is even said that the peace between Spain and England has fallen through owing to the conspiracy hatched by the priests.  However the Constable is supposed to be coming any day, though the King seems to have remarked that he is not impressed by the Constable’s visit nor by his compliments.
  
339.  English Raid on Algiers
              Venice
              April 30, 1604.
  Advices from Pisa say that a well-armed English ship, on board which was an envoy to the Duke of Florence, went to Algiers, and in the harbour there burnt up with fireworks eight vessels, galleys and galliots.  They thought to have caught Amurad  Reis, the owner of the vessels, but he was not on board.

339.  James and the Portuguese in India
              Antwerp
              May 14, 1604.
  The King of England has sent a nobleman to the Portuguese merchant, Simon Roderigo here, to treat about Portuguese trade to the East Indies.

339-340.  Peace Negotiations.  The Spaniards ask too much
              Antwerp
              July 2, 1604.
  London letters of the 10th June announce that the Spanish envoys and five of the King’s Commissioners have been meeting to discuss terms of peace.  The Spaniards began by asking what kind of peace the English required.  The English replied to this that it was the business of the Spaniards to explain themselves on the point.  The Spaniards demanded a peace offensive and defensive against the King’s enemies.  This the English refused.  Then the Spaniards asked merely for a defensive peace, whereby if one side or the other were attacked the other must come to his aid.  Thereupon the English declared that it was more to the point for them not to be at enmity with anybody than to be in need of aid from Spain, for they had no intention of breaking the peace in any direction.  Then the Spaniards asked to be informed whether the only wish of the English was that neither side should harm the other.  The Spaniards desired that the English should give no assistance to rebels against the King.  This the English took very ill, saying that it was contrary to the honour of their King.  However, this point will be further considered.

340.  Mutual Abolition of Customs Dues
              Rome
              August 14, 1604.
  Letters from France confirm the conclusion of peace between Spain and England.  The King of England does not after all cede to the Spaniards the three towns occupied in the Netherlands, but retains them for himself because the States General entrusted them to his guardianship.  The Spaniard promises the English freedom to trade in Spain, and absence of all future annoyance from the Inquisition.  The Customs dues of thirty per cent. imposed in both countries are to be abrogated on both sides.
  Notwithstanding this it is thought that the settlement of religious questions between English and Spaniards will give rise to quarrels in the future.

340-341.  Doubts as to the good faith of the Spaniards
              Antwerp
              August 16, 1604.
  The peace between England and Spain is not yet concluded.  The Spaniards have demanded insertion of many provisions to the detriment of the French Crown, but this has been refused them.  Many consider that it is only a formal peace that the Spaniards are trying for.  The Constable of Castile is still at Dunkirk and the English warships are still waiting for him, but he will stay there some time yet.  He wanted to purchase some jewels here through his Comptroller on three months’ credit, Francesco Sara giving security for payment.  But this latter refused to do it.  The Constable, however, can hardly go to England without these jewels, he simply must take them with him.

341.  Peace concluded but terms not yet published
              Antwerp
              September 10, 1604.
  We have letters of the 1st inst. from London stating that on the 29th ult. the conclusion of peace between Spain and England was made public.  The King gave the Constable of Castile and all the other gentlemen a very magnificent banquet, and presented them with some 100,000 carlins worth of silver plate and precious stones.  But the text of the peace is not to be printed until the King of Spain has personally sworn to observe it.  Therefore the King of England has despatched an envoy to Spain.  The Spaniards are to come back here again in a week.
  background: Karlsgulden, carolini or carlins were coins minted by the Popes and the Dukes of Florence, valued in England at 4d.

341.  English Ambassador for Venice
              Venice
              September 17, 1604.
  The English ambassador who is coming to reside here to represent his King has arrived at Padua.  He will stay there till a lodging is prepared for him here.

341.  The Marseillais capture an English Vessel in the Adriatic
              Venice
              October 22, 1604.
  The Spanish ministers have sent a copy of the Anglo-Spanish treaty of peace to the Grand Turk, and it contain a provision that the King of England and other sovereigns are free to make friendship and alliance with a heretical Prince.  Therefore it is likewise permissible for the King of Spain to make friends with the Turk.
  In the gulf here an English vessel arriving with muscatel wine from Candia has been captured by the Marseilles ship Angela.

342.  The Dutch capture two English Ships
              Antwerp
              October 22, 1604.
  From England we hear that the King there has recalled all ships which the late Queen had sent out to pillage at sea.  Some of them have already come back, but the Dutch have captured and taken to Holland two English ships laden with sugar and bund for Flanders.
  The Italians here aver that the King of Spain is not content with the peace with England.

342.  Skirmish at Sea between the English and Dutch
              Cologne
              October 22, 1604.
  In Holland and Flanders there is much talk of peace, and envoys have arrived in Holland from England, Denmark and the Saxon Princes, who are strongly urging peace.  A general assembly of the States General has been called for the 18th.  They want to repay the money lent them by the Queen of England on the security of Flushing and Briel and to get rid of the garrisons there.  So peace cannot be entirely relied on.
  It is reported from Brussels that the English and Dutch ships met at sea off Zeeland.  When the English would not pay the Dutch the customary courtesy of the sea by firing a salute, the Dutch fired at them in earnest.  The others did the same, and so a regular skirmish resulted, but who won is not known at present.  On the other hand, the King of England is said to be very solicitous about Spain and His Highness, so that it seems almost as though he would like to withdraw his support from the States General.

342-343.  The Dutch still distrust the Spaniards
              Cologne
              October 26, 1604.
  Twenty-six Articles have been received here, proposed by the King of England for the peace between Spain and the States General.  They would not be unreasonable if they were observed by the Spaniards, but as the States General have learnt that all ships in Spain are being detained, and that the King there is fitting out an Armada against Zeeland, they are disinclined to trust to this peace, and fear that by it the trap is being baited for the mouse.

343-344.  Articles of Peace
            unknown
            Undated
  Articles of the peace concluded between the Kings of England and Spain and to be observed by their subjects throughout the realm.
  1.  The loyal subjects of the King are to observe all articles of the peace just as in
    former times.
  2.  No ships may be detained in Spain, or be detained owing to injury done before 
    the conclusion of peace.
  3.  The subjects of the King of England enjoy free right of navigation in all the
    dominions of the King of Spain.
  4.  No foreigners are permitted to do the English any violence or wrong on 
    account of violence or wrong inflicted upon them before the conclusion of
    peace.
  5.  All embargoes on property are declared invalid.
  6.  If the subjects of the King of England have paid dues in one place, they shall 
    not be compelled to pay dues in any other place to which they may carry
    their goods.
  7.  They shall not be prevented from sending their wares to any place belonging
    to the King of Spain.
  8.  All imprisoned subjects of the King of England are to be liberated except those
    arrested for debt.
  9.  The subjects of the King have the right to use as large warehouses as they 
    please, and no one shall be compelled to keep trade accounts in either 
    Spanish or English.
  10.  The property of subjects of the King of England deceased in Spain belongs
    to their heirs.
  11.  No subject of the King may be arrested in Spain for voyaging to East or West
    India, to Turkey or to Barbary.
  12.  As concerns the subjects of the King of England, no inquisition or inquiry 
    may be instituted into their religion or about books in any place where 
    they may be dwelling or to where they may have delivered goods.
  13.  The subjects of the King of England may not be compelled to send their 
    goods to any particular place; on the contrary, they have the right to 
    transfer a portion of them if unsold to another place, and to obtain return 
    of dues therefor.
  14.  The subjects of the King shall elect a Council and deputies to examine all
    their galleys, and no Spaniard shall concern himself therewith.
  15.  Should, later on, war ensue between England and Spain, they are to have six
    months’ notice, in order to be able to remove their property.
  16.  Should they bring out of Spain money or contraband goods or merchandise 
    then only the contraband goods may be confiscated and none other.
      Articles concerning religion:
  17.  In their ships and in their houses they shall be able to practise their religion
    freely.
  18.  They shall not be compelled to attend church or to observe any ceremonies
    whatsoever.
  19.  If they should commit any offence against the Spanish religion they are to be
    sent back to England with their property.
  20.  Offences of Englishmen against religion are to be reported to England.
  21.  The subjects of the King of England shall not proceed to places in the West
    Indies outside the dominions of the King of Spain.

344.  Rejoicings at Antwerp
              Antwerp
              November 5, 1604.
  The peace with England was made public last Sunday, and then at nine o’clock in the evening all sorts of bonfires were lighted, feux de joie let off, and a great peace celebration was held with drums and fifes and discharge of cannon.

345.  Spanish Attempt to separate France and the States General
              Lyons
              November 21, 1604.
  The latest letters from England announce that by order of the King of England the Constable of Castile is to persuade our King to give no further assistance to the States General in order that the King of Spain may at length be able to attain peace with them.  But it is not thought that the King of France will assent.  The Constable of Castile has already left Fontainebleau again.

345.  Debates about the Union of England and Scotland
              Antwerp
              December 3, 1604.
  The latest letters from London announce that the Parliament and other important people are annoyed that the King has had himself proclaimed King of Great Britain without their previous knowledge.  But owing to this desire of His Majesty it is debated daily how the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland can be united under one title.
  In Scotland a rebellion seems to have occurred because the King of England has made peace with the King of Spain.  The King of Scots’ guard is said to have been slaughtered, and so His Majesty has a rebellion in his own country.
  The English envoys have not yet appeared in Brussels, but are expected shortly.  In the meanwhile Hollanders and Zeelanders incessantly attack and take English ships bound for Flanders and Spain, and carry off all captured cargo as their own property.

345-346.  The Low Countries still disinclined for Peace
              Antwerp
              December 10, 1604.
  All we hear from Brussels is that His Highness there is expecting an important embassy from the King of England.  His Highness has had some very handsome objects made of solid gold for presentation to the English envoys, as the King of England presented equally handsome gifts to the embassy of His Serene Highness.
  There is little talk of peace in Brussels.  The States General of the United Provinces desire to send Count Henry William of Nassau, youngest brother of Count Maurice, as ambassador to the King of England to treat for an alliance.

346.  The Peace has done little good to any one
              Antwerp
              December 12, 1604.
  His Highness in Brussels does not expect that English Embassy till March.  Instead of the gold dinner service which His Highness had intended to give, he is now having five cups and jugs made of solid gold valued at 50,000 carlins, to send to England as presents for the English gentlemen who helped to negotiate peace.  But this peace has so far done little good to trade or anything else.

346.  Turkish Maltreatment of English at Alexandria
              Venice
              December 24, 1604.
  It is confirmed that the Turks in Alexandria have been grossly maltreating the English, and it is therefore asserted that the King of England ill take steps against the Turks.